Age Differences in Spatial Navigation Stem From a Preference for Familiar
Routes Rather Than Impaired Landmark-Dependent Strategies
Paul F. Hill1, Skyelynn Bermudez1, Joshua D. Garren1, Andrew S. McAvan2, Jingyi Zheng3,
Carol A. Barnes1, 4, and Arne D. Ekstrom1, 4
1 Department of Psychology, University of Arizona
2 Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University
3 Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Auburn University
4 Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, University of Arizona
A leading hypothesis in the field of aging and navigation is that older adults are selectively impaired on tasks
that require allocentric (landmark-based) strategies to navigate, resulting in a shift toward more egocentric
(self-based) strategies. However, most evidence in humans comes from studies that restrict body-based
sensorimotor cues that are essential to both egocentric and allocentric navigation. In the present study,
young and older adults navigated a virtual environment in each of two conditions: a stationary desktop
condition that relied on visual input and an immersive condition that enabled unrestricted ambulation and
sensorimotor feedback during navigation. Both age groups performed worse when initially learning
locations from novel compared with familiar locations—often considered a hallmark of allocentric navigation. The cost of switching from familiar to novel start locations was equal between age groups, pointing
to a null effect of age on allocentric strategies. Older adults also employed distal landmarks to a comparable
extent to young adults, suggesting that landmark-dependent strategies did not differ by age. However, older
adults were more likely to replicate previously taken paths, potentially indicative of a preference for
egocentric strategies. The path replication effect was significantly attenuated in the immersive condition,
particularly in the presence of geometric boundary cues that could be used to infer distance. Age differences
in spatial navigation may therefore be driven in part by a selective bias for navigating familiar routes,
although these differences were lessened in the presence of multimodal visual and sensorimotor cues. The
present study highlights that navigation is a complex cognitive construct that draws on multiple parallel
systems and strategies that cannot be easily explained by a simple allocentric–egocentric dichotomy.
Public Significance Statement
Spatial navigation, which is essential for well-being and independence, declines during healthy aging. A
prevailing hypothesis is that impaired navigation in older age stems from selective deficits in allocentricbased wayfinding strategies. In the present study, we used advanced virtual reality techniques to reveal
that age-related differences in spatial navigation are more nuanced and likely arise from a combination of
factors rather than being solely attributable to impairments in allocentric navigation.
Keywords: spatial navigation, aging, allocentric, egocentric, virtual reality
Supplemental materials: https://doi.org/10.1037/pag0000927.supp
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
This article was published Online First August 28, 2025.
Hannes Zacher served as action editor.
Paul F. Hill https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9983-0842
De-identified data and analysis scripts are posted on https://osf.io/5vbzn/.
The ideas and data appearing in this article have previously been disseminated in a preprint (https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/b7n6s). This research
was supported by the Alzheimer’s Association (Grant AARF-22-926755)
awarded to Paul F. Hill and National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health (Grant R01AG003376) awarded to Carol A. Barnes and Arne D.
Ekstrom.
Paul F. Hill played a lead role in data curation, formal analysis, investigation, project administration, validation, visualization, and writing–original
draft, a supporting role in funding acquisition, and an equal role in conceptualization and writing–review and editing. Skyelynn Bermudez played a
supporting role in data curation, investigation, and project administration.
Joshua D. Garren played a supporting role in investigation and project
administration. Andrew S. McAvan played a lead role in software and a
supporting role in conceptualization and writing–review and editing. Jingyi
Zheng played a supporting role in formal analysis, software, and visualization. Carol A. Barnes played a lead role in funding acquisition and an
equal role in writing–review and editing. Arne D. Ekstrom played a lead
role in methodology and resources and an equal role in conceptualization,
funding acquisition, supervision, writing–original draft, and writing–
review and editing.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Paul F.
Hill or Arne D. Ekstrom, Department of Psychology, University of Arizona,
1503 East University Boulevard, Tucson, AZ 85721, United States. Email:
paulhill@arizona.edu or adekstrom@arizona.edu
Psychology and Aging
© 2025 American Psychological Association 2025, Vol. 40, No. 8, 913–928
ISSN: 0882-7974 https://doi.org/10.1037/pag0000927
913
914
HILL ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Past research suggests that successful navigation of new spatial
environments declines with healthy aging, although the reasons for
this finding remain unresolved (Lester et al., 2017). Spatial navigation is often considered to rely on two complementary strategies.
Allocentric or “placed-based” navigation requires learning the
relationships between external spatial cues, such as landmarks or
environmental boundaries, which in turn are thought to underlie
the computation of novel and more efficient routes. Egocentric or
“route-based” navigation involves self-reference to landmarks
and typically relies more on traveling familiar, well-learned
routes and is often considered to be less flexible and efficient than
allocentric navigation. One hypothesis in the field of aging is that
allocentric-based navigation is impaired in older age, resulting in
a preference for more egocentric-based navigation strategies
(Colombo et al., 2017; Iaria et al., 2003; Li & King, 2019; Moffat
et al., 2006).
The ability to form a cognitive map of the environment, which is
central to most models of allocentric navigation, is generally believed
to involve the integration of external (e.g., landmarks, boundaries)
and body-based (e.g., motor efference copy, proprioceptive, vestibular) sensory cues (Campbell et al., 2018; O’Keefe & Nadel, 1978;
Siegel & White, 1975). Prior studies in humans, however, have relied
overwhelmingly on experimental paradigms that require participants
to navigate a two-dimensional virtual reality (VR) environment
rendered on a computer monitor (Daugherty et al., 2015; Iaria
et al., 2009; Moffat & Resnick, 2002; Moffat et al., 2007; Zhong
et al., 2017). These types of “desktop VR” paradigms rely primarily on visual input while restricting the types of body-based
sensory cues that are central to allocentric and egocentric forms of
spatial navigation. Experimental studies employing desktop VR can
also be confounded by age differences in prior experience with using
a joystick or keyboard and mouse to navigate a first-person virtual
environment. Finally, many of these studies do not directly test how
landmarks are integrated during body and head movements. A critical
gap in the literature, therefore, concerns whether age differences in
navigation strategies persist when body-based cues are available to
support navigation (McAvan et al., 2021).
Age differences in allocentric navigation may also be dependent
on the types of visual cues available within the environment. Human
studies of spatial navigation often require participants to learn the
relationships between discrete landmarks, such as a unique building
or street sign. There is growing evidence, however, that older adults
may be selectively disadvantaged at using these types of visual
landmarks to orient in space (Colmant et al., 2023; West et al.,
2023). Instead, older adults may be more adept at using spatial cues
that convey the relative lengths, distances, and angles between largescale surfaces within the environment, such as walls or walkways.
Studies employing these types of geometric spatial cues have shown
that older adults are just as likely as younger individuals to orient
using putative allocentric search strategies (Bécu et al., 2020, 2023).
An overarching aim of the present study, therefore, was to examine
the extent to which age differences in navigation strategy preferences are affected by the availability of enriched visual and bodybased sensorimotor cues.
The Morris water maze (MWM) task is a commonly used
assessment of allocentric navigation and spatial memory (Morris
et al., 1982). Originally developed for rodents, the MWM task
involves learning the locations of hidden objects within an environment surrounded by distal landmark cues. Successful performance
on the task requires participants to learn and subsequently remember
the location of hidden objects with reference to the distal cues, which
is generally considered to depend on externally referenced allocentric
memory processes. Virtual adaptations of the MWM task developed
for human participants and administered on a desktop computer have
been used extensively to examine putative allocentric navigation
abilities in aged humans. Older adults are consistently observed to
remember locations with respect to distal landmarks less accurately
than do younger individuals on the MWM task (Daugherty & Raz,
2017; Daugherty et al., 2015; Hill et al., 2024; Iaria et al., 2009;
McAvan et al., 2021; Moffat & Resnick, 2002; Moffat et al., 2007;
Zhong et al., 2017). By contrast, older adults are generally observed to
perform just as well as younger individuals during conditions in
which visual cues indicate the location of a previously “hidden” target
(i.e., visible platform trials).
When employing the MWM and other spatial tasks, however, it is
important to note that allocentric and egocentric navigation strategies are difficult to isolate and common behavioral measures often
involve a combination of strategies and spatial reference frames
(Ekstrom et al., 2014; Johnsen & Rytter, 2021; Wolbers & Wiener,
2014). In the present study, we considered multiple measures of
putative allocentric navigation to reduce the potential influence of
this issue. One such measure involves manipulating the familiarity
of the navigation start positions such that participants are cued to
locate hidden targets from familiar (i.e., well-learned) and novel
locations (Eichenbaum et al., 1990; Kolarik et al., 2018; McAvan
et al., 2021; Wolbers & Wiener, 2014). The assumption is that
performance on familiar and novel start trials should be relatively
similar in those individuals using an allocentric reference frame to
infer the location of a hidden target. By contrast, those individuals
who rely more heavily on an egocentric reference frame should
perform reasonably well when taking a well-learned route from a
familiar start position but show reduced performance when navigating from a novel start position, which places a greater emphasis
on the distal landmark cues.
In the present study, we examined the impact of enriched visual
and body-based sensory cues on spatial memory as young and
older adults navigated a virtual MWM environment (Figure 1).
Participants were trained to find the locations of hidden targets in
a virtual outdoor environment in each of two VR conditions: a
desktop VR condition that required using a keyboard and mouse
to navigate and an immersive and ambulatory VR condition that
enabled unrestricted self-motion during navigation (see Hill
et al., 2024). We employed a version of the virtual MWM in
which four distal landmarks were clearly visible outside of the
navigable space in all environments. We tested older and young
adults on memory for a hidden target location from both a novel
and familiar (repeated) start location during both acquisition and
delayed probe trials.
On a subset of delayed probe trials, we rotated one of the distal
mountain cues to test participant reliance on the stable three
mountain cues or the single (moved) mountain. Greater reliance
on the single moved mountain cue might suggest a greater
reliance on a beaconing strategy. In a subset of participants (N =
48), a circular boundary was located outside of the navigable
arena to serve as a geometric spatial cue (Figure 1B). Critically,
the distal mountain cues and circular boundary wall were intended to convey unique sources of spatial information during
navigation. Whereas the distal mountain cues could be used to
AGING AND SPATIAL NAVIGATION STRATEGIES
915
infer relative directions within the otherwise featureless environment, the circular boundary was meant aid in the estimation
of relative distances within the navigable environment. The
experimental design therefore allowed us to test whether age
differences in navigation strategies are differentially affected
by the inclusion of geometric spatial cues (boundary vs. no
boundary) and/or body-based sensory cues (immersive VR vs.
desktop VR).
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Figure 1
Virtual Morris Water Maze Task Design
Note. (A) Visual depiction of the immersive and desktop virtual reality conditions. The assignment of the respective
environments (snow, desert) to each virtual reality condition (desktop, immersive) was fully counterbalanced across
participants, as was the testing order of the respective conditions. (B) First-person depiction of the available spatial
cues in the no boundary (distal mountains only) and boundary (distal mountains and perimeter wall) conditions. (C)
During the spatial acquisition blocks, participants were trained to locate the spatial positions of three hidden target
objects (color coded). Immediately following each spatial learning block, participants were cued to recall the location
of the hidden object without feedback (immediate probe trials). Following the learning blocks, participants completed
eight visible target trials to rule out potential age-related motivational and/or sensorimotor confounds. Participants
completed 12 delayed probe trials without feedback, during which they were cued to locate the hidden target when
starting from a familiar (solid bars) or novel (dashed bars) location. In a subset of the delayed probe trials, a singular
mountain cue was rotated 20° clockwise or counterclockwise unbeknownst to the participant. Figure adapted from
“Age Differences in Spatial Memory Are Mitigated During Naturalistic Navigation,” by P. F. Hill, S. Bermudez, A. S.
McAvan, J. D. Garren, M. D. Grilli, C. A. Barnes, and A. D. Ekstrom, 2024, Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition,
31(6), p. 1110 (https://doi.org/10.1080/13825585.2024.2326244). CC BY 4.0. HMD = head mounted display. See the
online article for the color version of this figure.
916
HILL ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Materials and Method
Transparency and Openness
We report exclusionary criteria and describe all manipulations
and measures that were collected. De-identified data and analysis
code are available from the first author upon request, and a link to
these materials is provided in the author note (Hill, 2025). The study
design and analysis procedure were not preregistered. The data
presented here were also presented in a previous article with a focus
on the impact of virtual testing modality on age differences in spatial
memory (Hill et al., 2024). The focus of the current article is instead
on testing hypotheses related to spatial strategy and age, an issue not
covered in the previous article. The descriptions of the participant
information and VR procedures overlap heavily with the descriptions given in that report and are partially summarized here. The
analyses and behavioral findings described below are novel and
have not been reported previously.
Participants
We recruited 45 young and 46 older adults from the University of
Arizona and surrounding communities. Participants were recruited
in two separate waves to be enrolled in the no-boundary (20 young,
20 older) and boundary (24 young, 24 older) versions of the MWM
task (see the Procedures section). One older adult voluntarily withdrew from the study due to a scheduling conflict; one young and one
older adult withdrew after experiencing mild motion sickness during
the VR task. The final participant sample included 44 young adults
(18–31 years; M = 21.50 years; SD = 3.23; 27 females) and 44 older
adults (63–80 years; M = 70.48 years; SD = 4.89; 21 females). The
final sample size (N = 88) was informed by an a priori power
analysis conducted in G*Power employing between-repeated
measures. The sample was selected to ensure power of 0.85 (at
p < .05) to detect Medium Age Group × VR Condition interactions
( f = .25) in a 2 (age group) × 2 (VR condition) analysis of variance
(ANOVA). Given the novelty of our study design, we elected to
perform a power analysis based on a conservative (medium) effect
size estimate to avoid underestimating the sample size needed to
detect a meaningful two-way interaction. A chi-square analysis
confirmed that the distribution of gender did not significantly differ
between the young and older adult groups (χ2 = 1.14, p = .285).
All participants gave informed consent in accordance with the
University of Arizona’s Institutional Review Boards and were
compensated at the rate of $18 per hour. All participants had normal
or corrected-to-normal color vision and normal or corrected-tonormal hearing and reported no history of cardiovascular problems,
neurological conditions, or motion sickness.
All older adult participants completed a neuropsychological test
battery on a day prior to the experimental VR session. The test
battery included multiple tests and scores in each of five broad
cognitive domains: memory (California Verbal Learning Test–II
Long Delay Free Recall, Delis et al., 2000; Rey–Osterrieth Complex
Figure Test Long Delay Free Recall, Rey, 1941), executive function
(Trail Making Tests A and B total time; Reitan & Wolfson, 1985),
language (F-A-S fluency, Spreen & Benton, 1977; category fluency,
Benton, 1968; Boston Naming Test, Goodglass et al., 2001), visuospatial abilities (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 4th edition Block
Design Test, Wechsler, 2009; Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Test
copy score, Rey, 1941), and verbal intelligence (Wechsler Adult
Intelligence Scale 4th edition Vocabulary and Similarities; Wechsler,
2009). Participants were excluded from entry into the study if they
scored greater than 1 SD below age-appropriate norms on any memory
test or greater than 1 SD below age norms on any two other tests.
These criteria were employed to minimize the likelihood of
including older individuals with mild cognitive impairment (Bondi
et al., 2008; Jak et al., 2009). Scores on the neuropsychological
assessments did not differ between older adults enrolled in the
boundary and no-boundary conditions (Supplemental Table 1).
Older adults in the respective boundary and no-boundary conditions also did not differ in years of education obtained, t(40.98) =
−0.45, p = .657 (boundary, M = 17.42 years, SD = 2.02; no
boundary, M = 17.65 years, SD = 1.42).
Procedure
Participants performed virtual adaptations of the MWM task. The
virtual environments and experimental tasks were built in Unity 3D
(Unity Technologies ApS, San Francisco, California) using the
Landmarks VR navigation package (Starrett et al., 2021). All
participants performed the task in each of two virtual conditions. In
the immersive VR condition, participants were equipped with a
wireless head mounted display (HTC Vive Pro Eye) and a handheld
HTC Vive controller. This setup was used to simulate an immersive
experience of being in a mountainous environment while simultaneously allowing for unrestricted locomotion and body-based
sensory cues during navigation. Participants also completed an
analogous version of the task on a desktop computer while seated in
a behavioral testing room. This desktop VR condition required using
a keyboard and mouse to navigate the two-dimensional environment.
The order of the respective immersive and desktop VR conditions was
fully counterbalanced across all participants. Additional technical
specifications for the respective VR conditions are described by Hill
et al. (2024).
Each virtual environment was rendered with a unique floor (snow
covered or desert, counterbalanced across the respective desktop
and immersive VR conditions) and four distally rendered mountains
located on the horizon. These distinctive renderings were meant to
reduce interference and potential carryover effects from the preceding
virtual session such that participants would treat the two environments
independently. The navigable environment in both the desktop and
immersive VR conditions was approximately 5 × 5 m in size, with the
full visible space spanning approximately 750 × 750 m. A subsample
of young (N = 20) and older (N = 20) adult participants performed a
version of the task in which the distal mountains were the sole source
of spatial information within the environment (i.e., no-boundary
condition). A separate sample of young (N = 24) and older (N = 24)
adult participants completed an identical version of the task apart from
a circular wall (20 m in diameter) placed around the perimeter of the
navigable space in addition to the four distal mountain cues (i.e.,
boundary condition).
Participants were trained to learn the location of three hidden
objects placed at fixed positions within the 5 × 5-m navigable space.
Each virtual environment was associated with three unique 3D
rendered objects (book, Rubik’s cube, teapot in the snow-covered
environment; alarm clock, mug, rotary phone in the desert environment). The objects were presented on pedestals at approximately
chest height. Participants completed 16 consecutive learning trials for
each target location. Prior to each trial in the immersive VR condition,
AGING AND SPATIAL NAVIGATION STRATEGIES
917
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
the headset displayed a blank screen while an experimenter guided the
participant along a random path for 30 s. This disorientation phase
was meant to prevent participants from tracking their locations and
movements from the previous trial. A similar disorientation phase was
included in the desktop VR condition, during which participants
viewed a blank screen for 30 s before starting the next trial.
Following the 30-s disorientation, participants were placed at one
of eight predetermined starting positions. Each block of 16 study
trials was organized into four subblocks, each corresponding to a
unique start position (e.g., four consecutive trials from Position 1,
followed by four consecutive trials from Position 5). Each study trial
began with visual instructions indicating the navigation goal (e.g.,
“Please find the book”). Participants then freely navigated while
searching for the hidden object that remained invisible for the first
30 s of the trial.
To encourage spatial learning, participants were instructed to
remember the fixed positions of the hidden objects and to navigate to
this location and respond via button press before 30 s had elapsed.
This button press was treated as a spatial memory response, and the
location and timestamp of the response were recorded in the data
output. Upon making a response, the object became visible to permit
spatial updating during the study trials. If a button response was not
made, the target object would appear after 30 s, and the participants’
location at the time the object became visible was logged in the data
output. At the end of each 16-trial spatial learning block, participants
were placed in a novel start position and instructed to navigate to the
location of the hidden target (immediate probe trials). Unlike the
immediately preceding study trials, the object did not appear after
30 s, nor did the object appear upon making a button press.
Following the three study blocks, participants completed one
block of eight visible target trials. During these trials, objects were
placed in their original studied locations and remained visible for the
entire duration of the trial. This was meant to serve as a control for
motivational and sensorimotor differences while performing the task
(Moffat & Resnick, 2002; Morris et al., 1982). The results of the
visible target trials are summarized in the Supplemental Materials
and described in more detail by Hill et al. (2024).
After completing eight visible target trials, participants performed
12 delayed probe trials to assess delayed spatial recall of the hidden
target locations. As with the immediate probe trials, the target object
did not appear after 30 s nor did it appear after a button press.
Participants were thus required to navigate to the location of the
hidden target object based solely on their memory. Upon reaching
this location, participants made a button press to record their location
and timestamp. In a separate set of three delayed probe trials (one trial
for each hidden target object), we rotated the position of a single
mountain cue 20° clockwise or counterclockwise to assess potential
age differences in the relative use and weighting of distal landmark
cues during navigation (see Analytic Approach). For these trials, we
rotated the mountain with an angular orientation closest to that of the
hidden target object when standing in the center of the arena. This
was done to ensure the mountain was clearly visible when facing the
hidden target location.
Analytic Approach
Position and rotation data were recorded throughout the entire
experiment at a sampling rate of approximately 10 Hz. All statistical
analyses were conducted with R software (R Core Team, 2022). All
t tests were two-tailed and performed using the t.test function in the
base R package. Welch’s unequal variance t tests were performed
when assumptions of equal variance were not met. Multiple regression
analyses were conducted using the lm function in the base R package.
ANOVAs were conducted using the afex package (Singmann et
al., 2016), and the Greenhouse–Geisser procedure (Greenhouse &
Geisser, 1959) was used to correct degrees of freedom for nonsphericity when necessary. Post hoc tests on significant effects
from the ANOVAs were conducted using the emmeans package
(Lenth, 2018) and corrected for multiple comparisons using the
Holm-Bonferroni procedure where appropriate. Bayesian mixedeffects regression models for circular data were performed using
the bpnme package in R (Cremers et al., 2018). Unless otherwise
specified, we report the results of three-way mixed-factorial ANOVAs
with between-subject factors of age group (young, older) and cue type
(boundary, no boundary) and the within-subject factor of VR condition
(desktop, immersive). Bayes factor values (BF10) were computed using
the BayesFactor package (Morey et al., 2022) and interpreted using the
categorical labels proposed by Jeffreys (1961).
Switching Between Familiar and Novel Routes
During the study phase, young and older adult participants were
trained to learn target locations by navigating from fixed locations
within the respective virtual environments. These locations were
organized in a blocked format such that each starting location was
repeated over four consecutive trials for a given target before moving
to a novel start position and repeating this process for the same target.
This blocked format was meant to ensure participants learned a
specific start location by having participants repeatedly navigate from
this location. Participants were therefore cued to recall hidden target
locations from familiar (i.e., previously learned) and novel start
positions. Prior studies have employed familiar and novel start
positions as an assay of egocentric and allocentric navigation
strategies, respectively (Eichenbaum et al., 1990; Kolarik et al.,
2018; McAvan et al., 2021; Wolbers & Wiener, 2014).
We tested whether older adults would show greater “switching
costs” when taking a novel compared with a familiar route to locate
the hidden target (Harris & Wolbers, 2014; Harris et al., 2012), a
proxy for egocentric navigation strategies. Spatial memory was
operationalized as the Euclidean distance (in virtual meters) between
the remembered and true location of each target object (i.e., spatial
distance error). To maximize route familiarity, performance on
familiar trials was computed as the mean distance error on the fourth
consecutive trial initiated from a given location within the environment (i.e., the fourth and final trial of each block). Performance
on novel trials was similarly computed as the mean spatial distance
error on trials immediately following each familiar trial (i.e., the first
trial of the next block, including immediate probe trials).
We also examined whether young and older adults differed in
their tendency to replicate familiar, previously learned paths when
switching to a novel start position. We reasoned that participants
preferring more of an egocentric or route-based strategy would tend
to replicate familiar paths even when navigating from a novel start
position. This should result in greater familiar-to-novel path similarity compared with those preferring a more allocentric strategy
(Iggena et al., 2023). We quantified path replication as the spatial
distance between navigation paths taken on consecutive familiar
(i.e., fourth and final trial of a given block) and novel (i.e., first trial
918
HILL ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
of the next block) trials. Navigation paths were defined as the vector
of XY coordinates of the VR headset over the duration of a given
trial. Consecutive paths were aligned to obtain a common starting
coordinate (0, 0). To account for differences in path length, we used
a nonlinear dynamic time warping algorithm to find the optimal
match between each respective pair of navigation trajectories using
the dtw package in R (Giorgino, 2009) function. This analysis thus
yielded a measure of dissimilarity between respective paths, with
higher scores indicating less similarly (or more allocentric) and lower
scores indicating more similar trajectories (or more egocentric).
Landmark-Based Navigation During Delayed
Probe Trials
Successful allocentric navigation requires encoding the spatial
relationships between stable landmarks within the environment.
One possibility is that older adults are less likely than young adults
to orient toward the distal mountain cues when attempting to locate
the hidden target. To examine this possibility, we computed the trialwise angular difference between participant heading at the time of
retrieval (button press) during the delayed probe trials and the heading
error for each of the respective distal mountain cues, yielding four
estimates of landmark error. Landmark error was computed separately
for each of the respective distal mountain cues (yielding four landmark error estimates). For each trial, we identified the smallest of the
four landmark error estimates and used these values as the dependent
variable in a mixed-effect regression analysis. This approach was
motivated by the assumption that the most salient distal cues used
to orient within the environment would yield the smallest angular
distance error. We similarly computed the trial-wise angular difference between participant heading at retrieval and the correct heading
of the hidden target object (target error). Target and landmark error
values could thus range from 0° to 360°.
We used Bayesian mixed-effect regression models for circular
data (Cremers et al., 2018) to examine whether young and older
adults differed in their tendency to orient toward the distal mountain
cues and/or hidden target during the delayed probe trials (Cremers &
Klugkist, 2018; Du et al., 2023). We constructed separate models for
landmark and target error. For each model, we entered heading error
(transformed to range from −180° to 180° then converted to radians)
as the dependent variable. Age group, VR condition, and cue type
were entered into the model as fixed-effect predictors, and bysubject intercept terms were entered as random effects (angular
error – age group + subject). We used the bpnme package in R
(Cremers, 2020) to run a Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo
sampler with 1,000 iterations for the mixed-effects model to
calculate the posterior estimates of the landmark and target errors
for each age group, VR condition, and cue type, the circular means,
and 95% higher posterior density (HPD) interval of the respective
angular error estimates.
We next examined the subset of probe trials in which a single
distal mountain cue was rotated 20° clockwise or counterclockwise.
We computed the distance error between a given object’s remembered location and the hypothetical location of that object if it were
rotated 20° commensurate with the rotated mountain cue (rotated
error). We then divided the rotated error by the sum of the rotated error
and the true distance error between the estimated and true (unrotated)
location of that target object: error index = rotation error/(rotation
error + true error). Values approaching 0 signify greater weighting
of the rotated mountain cue (i.e., beacon strategy), and values
approaching 1 indicate greater weighting of the three stationary
mountain cues (i.e., allocentric strategy). Due to a programming
error, the direction (clockwise vs. counterclockwise) of the cue
rotations was not properly recorded in the desktop condition.
Analysis of the rotated mountain cues was therefore restricted to
the immersive VR condition.
Results
Older Adults Do Not Show Selectively Worse
Performance Compared With Young Adults When
Finding a Hidden Target From a Novel Start
Location Compared With a Familiar One
The ability to switch between familiar and novel routes to locate
hidden targets is often used as a proxy for allocentric navigation
strategies in the MWM task (Eichenbaum et al., 1990; Kolarik et al.,
2018; McAvan et al., 2021; Wolbers & Wiener, 2014). Here, we
tested whether older adults would show worse performance compared with young adults when navigating to the hidden target from a
novel start position compared with a well-learned and familiar start
position within the environment. To this end, we submitted the mean
distance error during the acquisition trials to a four-way mixedfactorial ANOVA with factors of age group (young, older), VR
condition (immersive, desktop), cue type (boundary, no boundary),
and start position (novel, familiar). This analysis revealed a significant main effect of start position, F(1,84) = 60.47, p = 1.7−11,
partial η2 = .419, BF10 = 78.546. Post hoc tests confirmed that this
effect was driven by increased distance error when starting from a
novel start position compared with starting from a familiar start
position, t(84) = −7.78, p < .001.
Critically, the interaction between age group and start position
was not significant, and a Bayes value suggested strong evidence in
favor of the null hypothesis, F(1,84) = 0.46, p = .499, partial η2 =
.005, BF10 = .167. The respective interactions between start position
and VR condition, F(1,84) = 1.49, p = .226, partial η2 = .017, BF10 =
.183, and between start position and cue type, F(1,84) = 1.24, p =
.269, partial η2 = .015, BF10 = .197, were also nonsignificant, with
strong Bayes evidence in favor of the null hypothesis. Indeed,
familiar versus novel effect size estimates were largely similar for
young and older adults across the respective VR and cue type
conditions (see Table 1). These findings suggest that older adults are
not selectively impaired when attempting to locate the hidden target
from a novel start location compared with young adults.
During the delayed probe trials, participants were prompted to
locate each of the respective hidden targets from memory following a delay while navigating from novel start locations (i.e.,
starting locations not encountered during the spatial learning
phase). On a subset of delayed probe trials (two of 12 total trials),
participants were prompted to locate the hidden target when
starting from a familiar location encountered during the spatial
learning phase. We submitted the mean distance error during the
delayed probe trials to a four-way ANOVA with factors of age
group (young, older), VR condition (immersive, desktop), cue type
(boundary, no boundary), and start position (novel, familiar). The
four-way ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of start position,
F(1,84) = 114.91, p = 5.7−16, partial η2 = .578 which, in contrast to
the study trials, was driven by greater distance error when starting
AGING AND SPATIAL NAVIGATION STRATEGIES
919
Study trials
Immersive, boundary
Immersive, no boundary
Desktop, boundary
Desktop, no boundary
Delayed probe trials
Immersive, boundary
Immersive, no boundary
Desktop, boundary
Desktop, no boundary
−3.13**
−5.15***
−2.05*
−2.20*
3.12**
3.62***
1.42
2.54*
0.99 (.11)
1.62 (.12)
0.82 (.16)
1.78 (.18)
1.59 (.15)
2.69 (.16)
1.35 (.25)
2.36 (.27)
1.22 (.11)
2.03 (.12)
1.03 (.18)
2.02 (.19)
1.25 (.12)
2.25 (.13)
1.17 (.19)
1.99 (.21)
−3.32**
−3.34**
−1.82
−2.03*
2.53*
5.72***
4.52***
6.14***
1.53 (.11)
2.44 (.12)
2.54 (.16)
3.44 (.18)
2.18 (.15)
3.27 (.16)
3.32 (.25)
4.04 (.27)
1.78 (.11)
2.71 (.12)
2.72 (.18)
3.66 (.19)
1.93 (.12)
2.57 (.13)
2.72 (.19)
3.16 (.21)
Note. Estimated marginal means (with standard error). Values from two-sided paired t tests comparing distance error on familiar and novel start trials are
presented.
*
p < .05. ** p < .01. *** p < .001.
from a familiar compared with novel start position, t(84) = 10.72, p <
.001. The interaction between cue type and start position was also
significant, F(1,84) = 8.26, p = .005, partial η2 = .090. Post hoc tests
confirmed that this interaction was driven by significantly larger
switching costs in the no-boundary, t(84) = 9.20, p < .001, compared
with the boundary, t(84) = 5.82, p < .001, conditions. Note that a
permutation test accounting for the unbalanced number of familiar
and novel trials produced an equivalent pattern of results (see
Supplemental Materials).
The three-way interaction between age group, VR condition, and
start position was also significant, F(1,84) = 4.25, p = .042, partial
η2 = .048. To unpack this interaction, we ran a follow-up Age × Start
Position ANOVAs separately for the immersive and desktop VR
conditions. The interaction between age and start position was
significant in the desktop VR condition, F(1,86) = 11.01, p = .001,
partial η2 = .113, and was driven by a significantly larger effect
of start position in older, t(86) = 7.43, p < .001, compared with
younger, t(86) = 2.74, p = .007, individuals. The analysis of the
immersive VR condition revealed a significant main effect of start
position, F(1,86) = 49.37, p = 4.7−10, partial η2 = .365. Importantly,
the interaction between age and start position when navigating in the
immersive VR environment was not significant, F(1, 86) = 0.28, p =
.596, partial η2 = .003. These results suggest that, in contrast to the
study trials, participants generally performed worse (i.e., greater
distance error) when attempting to locate the hidden target from a
familiar start position compared with a novel start position following
a delay. One possibility is that this pattern of effects relates to
interference, a possibility we explore in the discussion. Notably,
though, age differences in finding the hidden target from a novel
compared with a familiar position were only evident in desktop VR
and not present in either of the two immersive VR conditions tested
(boundary and no boundary) (Figure 2).
Age Differences in Path Rigidity When Switching
Between Familiar and Novel Start Positions During
Spatial Learning Are Attenuated in Immersive VR
We next examined whether young and older adults differed in
their tendency to replicate previously learned paths when switching
from a familiar to a novel start position during the study phase
(see Figure 3). We submitted mean path dissimilarity (see the
Analytic Approach section) to a three-way mixed-factorial ANOVA
with factors of age group (young, older), VR condition (immersive,
desktop), and cue type (boundary, no boundary). This analysis revealed significant main effects of age, F(1,84) = 57.39, p = 4.3−11,
partial η2 = .406; VR condition, F(1,84) = 68.90, p = 1.5−12, partial
η2 = .451; and cue type, F(1,84) = 18.84, p = 3.9−5, partial η2 = .183.
The interaction between age and VR condition was also significant,
F
(1,84) = 19.34, p = 3.2−5, partial η2 = .187. Critically, these effects
remained significant when controlling for age- and VR-related differences in angular rotations (see Supplemental Materials).
Post hoc pairwise comparisons of age group and VR condition
revealed significant differences between all levels of these interacting variables. We note that effect size estimates were maximal
when comparing young and older adults in the desktop VR condition (young > older contrast), immersive VR: t(84) = −4.72, p <
.001; desktop VR: t(84) = −7.44, p < .001, and when comparing
immersive and desktop performance in young adults (immersive >
desktop contrast), young: t(84) = −8.98, p < .001; older: t(84) =
−2.76, p = .007. These results suggest that older adults were
generally more likely to stick with a familiar path compared with
young adults but that this age difference was significantly reduced in
the immersive VR condition. Critically, reduced age differences in
the immersive VR condition were driven by a tendency for young
adults to take more familiar (i.e., egocentric) routes rather than a
shift toward more novel (i.e., allocentric) routes in older adults (see
Figure 3B).
The three-way interaction between age group, VR condition, and
cue type (boundary vs. no boundary) was not significant, F(1,84) =
2.56, p = .113, partial η2 = .030. Prior work, however, suggests that
the presence of environmental boundaries might moderate age
differences in allocentric navigation (Bécu et al., 2020, 2023).
Motivated by these prior findings, we submitted mean path dissimilarity to Exploratory Age × Cue Type ANOVAs separately for
the desktop and immersive VR conditions to examine whether the
presence of boundaries might moderate any of the observed age
differences in path dissimilarity. The analysis of the immersive VR
condition revealed a significant interaction between age group
and cue type, F(1,84) = 4.72, p = .033, partial η2 = .053. Post hoc
comparisons revealed significant age differences in path similarity
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Table 1
Mean Distance Error (With Standard Error) When Navigating From Familiar and Novel Start Positions
Condition
Young adult
Older adult
Familiar
Novel
t value
Familiar
Novel
t value
920
HILL ET AL.
Note. (A) On study trials, distance error was greater when starting from a novel position. The
size of this effect was not moderated by age group, virtual reality condition, or cue type. (B) On
delayed probe trials, distance error was greater when starting from a familiar position. This effect
was significantly larger in the absence of the boundary cue. Likewise, age differences in the
magnitude of these novel-to-familiar switching costs were significant in the desktop virtual
reality condition, but not when navigating in the immersive virtual reality environment. See the
online article for the color version of this figure.
in the no-boundary condition, t(84) = −4.67, p < .001, BF10 =
248.893, along with a null effect of age in the boundary condition,
t(84) = −1.89, p = .062, BF10 = 1.421. The interaction between
age group and VR condition was not significant in the desktop VR
condition, F(1,84) = 0.61, p = .436, partial η2 = .007, and post hoc
tests confirmed that the effect of age was highly significant in both
the boundary, t(84) = −4.94, p < .001, and no-boundary, t(84) =
−5.66, p < .001, desktop VR conditions. Although they should be
interpreted cautiously, these results suggest that the presence of
the perimeter boundary mitigated the tendency of older adults to
replicate a previously learned path when navigating from a novel
start location, but only in the immersive VR condition.
Older Adults Orient Toward Landmarks as Effectively
as Younger Adults but Show Greater Angular Error
When Orientating Toward the Hidden Target
We next examined whether older adults were impaired at using
the distal landmarks to navigate. To this end, we examined whether
young and older adults differed in their relative tendency to orient in
the direction of the distal mountain cues during the delayed probe
trials (i.e., landmark error, see the Analytic Approach section).
Landmark error was numerically but not significantly lower in older
adults (M = 0.29 radians, 95% HPD 0.25–0.35) compared with
young adults (M = 0.36 radians, 95% HPD 0.30–0.42). Landmark
error did not significantly differ between the immersive (M = 0.28
radians, 95% HPD 0.24–0.32) and desktop (M = 0.38 radians, 95%
HPD 0.32–0.45) VR conditions or between the boundary (M = 0.35
radians, 95% HPD 0.30–0.45) and no-boundary (M = 0.30 radians,
95% HPD 0.25–0.35) conditions. These findings suggest that older
adults were able to orient to each of the four landmarks comparably
with young adults.
We next considered how young and older adults might orient
differently toward the hidden targets. Consistent with past reports of
greater spatial distance error in older adults when locating hidden
targets (Hill et al., 2024; McAvan et al., 2021), angular target error
was reliably lower in young adults (M = 0.55 radians, 95% HPD
0.45–0.66) compared with older adults (M = 1.02 radians, 95% HPD
0.79–1.32). Angular target error was also lower in the boundary
condition (M = 0.44 radians, 95% HPD 0.37–0.52) compared with
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Figure 2
Distance Error “Switching Costs” When Starting From Familiar Start Position
Compared With Novel Start Position
AGING AND SPATIAL NAVIGATION STRATEGIES
921
Note. (A) Example routes taken on consecutive trials initiated from a well-learned and familiar start position (left panels) and a novel start position (right
panels). The paths were realigned to create a common starting coordinate. The top row illustrates high path dissimilarity, which is indicative of an allocentric
strategy. The bottom row illustrated highly similar paths, which is indicative of an egocentric strategy. (B) Bar plot (top panel) illustrating the effect of age group
on mean path distance (i.e., path dissimilarity) separately for virtual reality (VR) condition and cue type. Age differences in path similarity were significantly
attenuated in the immersive VR condition compared with the desktop VR condition. The spaghetti plots (bottom panel) emphasize that attenuated age effects in
the immersive VR condition were driven by increased path similarity among young adults. See the online article for the color version of this figure.
the no-boundary condition (M = 1.32 radians, 95% HPD 1.00–
1.63). Target errors in the immersive (M = 0.66 radians, 95% HPD
0.54–0.79) and desktop (M = 0.82 radians, 95% HPD 0.61–1.01)
VR conditions did not reliably differ, as indicated by overlapping
95% HPD intervals. These findings suggest that older adults performed worse at orienting toward the target, although this did not
appear to relate to an inability to orient toward the landmarks.
Older Adults Do Not Show a Selective Tendency to Rely
on a Single Landmark Compared With Young Adults
External landmarks can often act as reference points or “beacons”
when located near a goal location. Navigating toward these fixed
landmarks moves the navigator closer to the goal location without
placing any explicit demands on egocentric stimulus-motor associations or more abstracted allocentric representations (Waller &
Lippa, 2007; Wiener et al., 2013). Although young and older adults
did not differ in their tendency to orient toward the distal landmarks,
the above analyses do not rule out the possibility that older adults
were over reliant on using a single landmark to navigate (beacon
strategy) rather than triangulating spatial positions based on multiple
landmarks (allocentric strategy) (see Wiener et al., 2013). To
address this possibility, we rotated the single distal mountain cue
with the angular orientation closest to that of the hidden target on a
subset of the delayed probe trials. We reasoned that among those
participants relying on a single mountain cue to locate the hidden
target, distance error would predictably rotate along with the moved
mountain (Figure 4A). Alternatively, participants who triangulate
their position using multiple distal mountain cues should be less
affected by the single rotated mountain (see McAvan et al., 2021).
The rotation indices for each age group and cue type are illustrated in Figure 4B. A two-way ANOVA with factors of age group
(young, older) and cue type (boundary, no boundary) showed no
significant main effect of age group, F(1,81) = 0.48, p = .493, partial
η2 = .006, BF10 = .272, as well as a nonsignificant Age Group × Cue
Type interaction, F(1,81) = 0.53, p = .468, partial η2 = .007, BF10 =
.362. These findings suggest that older adults did not rely on a single
mountain cue to a greater extent than young adults. The main effect
of cue type was also not significant, F(1,81) = 0.87, p = .353, partial
η2 = .011, BF10 = 1.25, though the Bayes value suggested weak or
“anecdotal” evidence for the alternative hypothesis.
To further explore the effects of the rotated mountain cue, we
performed one-sample t tests (two-tailed) to compare rotation
indices against a hypothetical mean of 0.50 separately for each age
group and cue type. Values at or below 0.5 would suggest a tendency to use a single landmark to a greater extent than the collection
of the three landmarks. Error indices were significantly greater than
0.50 among older adults in the boundary condition (M = 0.52, SD =
0.04), t(22) = 2.38, p = .026, suggesting a potential greater reliance
on an allocentric strategy. Rotation indices in young adults did not
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Figure 3
Path Replication During Spatial Learning
922
HILL ET AL.
Note. (A) A singular distal mountain cue was rotated 20° clockwise or counterclockwise on a subset
of the delayed probe trials. The blue and red dots indicate the actual and hypothetical rotated location of
the hidden target, respectively. (B) Rotation indices did not significantly differ between age groups or
cue types. (C) Rotation indices negatively covaried with distance errors estimated during the delayed
probe trials. This negative association was moderated by cue type, with a stronger negative association
observed in the no-boundary condition compared with the boundary condition. See the online article
for the color version of this figure.
significantly differ from 0.5 in either of the cue type conditions,
boundary: M = 0.52, SD = 0.07, t(22) = 1.50, p = .148; no
boundary: M = 0.52, SD = 0.05, t(18) = 1.68, p = .110, nor did they
differ from 0.5 among older adults in the no-boundary condition
(M = 0.50, SD = 0.03), t(19) = 0.52, p = .607. These results suggest
that, although young and older adults show a relatively equal
weighting of the rotated and unmoved mountain cues, older adults
might show a slight preference for using multiple stationary
landmarks when additional boundary cues are also present.
Individual Differences in Reliance on Multiple
Landmarks Relate to the Precision of Remembering the
Hidden Target Independent of Age
In a final set of analyses, we examined whether individual differences in rotation indices were related to the precision of spatial
memories for target locations during the nonrotated delayed probe
trials. We reasoned that those who rely more heavily on the collection
of unmoved landmarks to orient within the environment (allocentric
strategy) would be able to remember target locations more precisely
than those who relied more heavily on a single rotated cue (beacon
strategy). To test this idea, we performed a multiple regression
analysis with mean distance error on the delayed probe trials as the
dependent variable and rotation indices, age group, cue type, and the
respective two- and three-way interaction terms as independent
variables. This analysis revealed a significant negative linear relationship between distance error and rotation indices (β = −8.63),
F
(1,77) = 28.23, p = 1.0−6. Critically, the interaction between age
group and rotation indices was not significant, F(1,77) = 0.79, p =
.378. This pattern of results suggests that, regardless of age, participants who were more likely to use multiple unmoved mountains to
locate the hidden target on rotated probe trials generally performed
better on the nonrotated delayed probe trials.
We also found a significant interaction between rotation indices
and cue type, F(1,81) = 4.67, p = .034. To unpack these results further,
we computed partial correlations between distance error and rotation
indices separately for the boundary and no-boundary conditions
while controlling for age group (Figure 4C). This revealed a robust
and significant negative correlation between distance error and
rotation indices in the no-boundary condition (rpartial = −.61,
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Figure 4
Rotated Mountain Trials
AGING AND SPATIAL NAVIGATION STRATEGIES
923
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
p = 3.3−5). A nonsignificant negative correlation was also evident in
the boundary condition that was comparatively weaker than that
observed in the no-boundary condition (rpartial = −.29, p = .054). In
other words, those who relied on multiple mountains to a greater
extent when the boundary was present did not show the same
advantage when finding the target compared with trials on which the
boundary was not present.
Discussion
To test the hypothesis that older adults have a selective deficit in
allocentric navigation, we examined spatial strategies in a sample of
young and older adults as they navigated a virtual MWM environment. This paradigm has a long history of being used to examine
spatial strategies and age-related differences in spatial memory in
rodents (Barnes et al., 1980; Gallagher et al., 2015). Studies using
virtual adaptations of the MWM in humans suggest that older adults
often experience navigation difficulties. This is often suggested to be
linked to a selective deficit in hippocampal-mediated allocentric
wayfinding strategies, which is frequently accompanied by a shift
toward a preference for egocentric-based navigation strategies in
older age (Colombo et al., 2017; Li & King, 2019). It bears special
mention, however, that egocentric and response-based strategies
have been conflated in some past studies of the MWM, and debate
remains regarding the extent to which allocentric and egocentric
measures can be cleanly dissociated (Ekstrom et al., 2014; Johnsen
& Rytter, 2021). In the present study, we considered multiple
measures of putative allocentric and egocentric navigation to reduce
the potential influence of this confound and isolate the specific factors
that might best account for age differences in navigation performance.
Moreover, the design of our experimental conditions allowed us to
test whether age differences in navigation performance are differentially affected by the inclusion of geometric spatial cues (boundary
vs. no boundary) and/or idiothetic sensorimotor cues (immersive VR
vs. desktop VR).
Evidence for age differences in putative allocentric versus egocentric navigation preferences was mixed. Young and older adults
did not differ when navigating from a novel start location compared
with a familiar start location on the spatial acquisition trials. The two
age groups also did not differ when using distal landmarks to guide
navigation during the delayed probe trials. However, older adults
were more likely than younger individuals to replicate previously
learned paths when navigating from a novel start position, consistent
with a preference for familiar routes and egocentric navigation. The
size of this age effect, however, was significantly attenuated in the
immersive version of the task, particularly when a circular boundary
cue was included within the environment. Taken together, our results suggest that the effects of age on spatial navigation are complex
and cannot be fully explained in terms of a simple “deficit” in
allocentric navigation.
The clearest evidence in support of an age-related preference for
egocentric strategy use was observed with our path replication
analyses. Older adults were more likely than young adults to
replicate a well-learned path when switching between familiar and
novel start positions. As described in the foregoing paragraph,
however, these age differences were significantly attenuated when
tested in the immersive VR condition, particularly when a boundary
cue was present. Interestingly, this age effect was driven by
younger individuals. Whereas older adults did not reliably differ
between the two VR conditions, young adults were more likely to
replicate a previously learned path in the immersive version of the
task, when the full range of ambulatory cues was available (see
Figure 3, bottom panel). Body-based cues have been suggested to
exert a disproportionate influence on egocentric tasks that require
monitoring one’s own position in space (Huffman & Ekstrom,
2021; Tuena et al., 2022). The enriched ambulatory cues in the
immersive VR condition may have biased young adults toward
repeating more familiar paths when navigating to the hidden target
locations. An alternative (though not mutually exclusive) possibility is that young adults were more likely to adopt landmarkdependent strategies when navigating in the absence of body-based
cues in the desktop VR environment, resulting in a greater tendency
to navigate novel paths when starting from a new start position.
Though speculative, this interpretation is consistent with our observation that landmark error was reliably reduced in the primarily visual
desktop VR condition compared with the ambulatory immersive VR
condition (see Figure 5A).
It is not readily apparent why path replication in older adults was
not similarly affected by VR modality. One possibility is that the
influence of body-based cues on egocentric strategy preferences is
weakened in older age, potentially due to reduced sensorimotor
acuity or changes in gait patterns and functional mobility (Hill &
Ekstrom, 2025). Alternatively, older adults may have been less
likely than young individuals to navigate novel paths in the desktop
VR condition due to a comparative lack of computer fluency and
gaming experience (Charness & Boot, 2022; Hill et al., 2024).
However, another possibility is that age differences in path replication reflect a general failure in older adults to accurately update
their spatial position orientation toward fixed landmarks when
navigating from a novel location (Merhav & Wolbers, 2019;
Rosenzweig et al., 2003). Nevertheless, the path replication analysis
suggests that older adults were more likely than their younger
counterparts to stick with a familiar route in both VR conditions, even
when doing so was less efficient and more likely to result in spatial
errors (i.e., when navigating from a novel start position). We caution,
however, that this pattern of results should not be taken to infer a
selective deficit in allocentric navigation, per se. Instead, these results
may simply reflect a deficit in spatial updating or a preference for
taking the more familiar, albeit less efficient, path.
Allocentric wayfinding strategies are typically evaluated based on
the ability to use novel paths and shortcuts to reach a spatial goal.
Critically, these novel paths are almost always designed to offer a
more efficient alternative to taking a familiar but less direct route to
reach the same goal. As a consequence, most experimental paradigms
conflate path familiarity with path inefficiency. This represents a
critical and often overlooked confound in studies assessing agerelated differences in allocentric/egocentric navigation. Older adults
are generally more risk averse than young adults and are more likely
to engage in familiarity-seeking behaviors to avoid more uncertain
outcomes (Albert & Duffy, 2012; Frank & Seaman, 2023; Spreng &
Turner, 2021). Thus, behaviors that resemble allocentric deficits in
older age may simply reflect a preference for more familiar and
predictable routes. Developing novel experimental methods to
dissociate between path familiarity and efficiency is necessary to
adjudicate between these respective sources of navigation errors
in older age.
During the delayed probe trials, both young and older adults
showed an advantage when recalling the hidden target from a novel
924
HILL ET AL.
Note. Angular distance between participant heading and (A) distal mountain landmarks and (B) hidden target location at the time a memory response was
made during the delayed probe trials. The polar histograms in the left panels illustrate the distribution of landmark and target error (in degrees) collapsed across
the virtual reality conditions and cue types. The bar plots in the right panels illustrate the circular means of landmark and target error (in radians) separately for
each age group, virtual reality condition, and cue type. The error bars represent the 95% higher posterior density derived from the circular mixed-effects
regression models. See the online article for the color version of this figure.
compared with a familiar start location. This novelty advantage was
significantly greater in older adults compared with younger individuals
when navigating in the desktop VR environment. The two age groups
did not significantly differ, however, when navigating in the immersive VR environment. We reported a similar novelty advantage
in an independent sample of young and older adults navigating an
immersive VR MWM similar to that reported here (McAvan et al.,
2021). We note, however, that this prior study did not involve a direct
comparison with desktop VR and, unlike the current paradigm,
provided continuous visual feedback during the delayed probe trials,
which may have enabled spatial updating during retrieval. One
possibility is that navigating from novel locations introduced a degree
of proactive interference, resulting in less precise spatial memory
retrieval when navigating from familiar locations that were encountered during the spatial acquisition period. In other words, participants
may have updated their spatial representations when tested from novel
locations, and this may have interfered with spatial memories that were
encoded during the spatial acquisition period. At present, the reasons
for this effect are unclear, and additional work is necessary to replicate
and further parse the source of this novelty advantage.
Impaired spatial navigation in older age has also been proposed to
stem from inefficiencies in using discrete landmarks to learn and
subsequently navigate spatial environments (Colmant et al., 2023;
West et al., 2023). This form of “landmark-dependent” navigation is
often suggested to rely on hippocampal-mediated allocentric computations (Lester et al., 2017; Li & King, 2019). To examine whether
older adults were less efficient than young adults at using the distal
landmarks, we computed the angular distance between participant
heading at the time a memory response was made on the delayed
probe trials and the heading of the closest distal mountain cue.
Critically, young and older adults did not significantly differ in their
tendency to orient toward one of the distal landmarks, with older
adults even showing a slight numerical advantage. Moreover, both
age groups were more likely to orient toward the distal mountain cue
than the actual location of the hidden target.
It is worth noting, however, that the statistically equivalent orienting to landmarks in young and older adults does not rule out the
possibility that older adults were simply relying on a single distal
cue as a beacon to guide spatial memory. To address this possibility,
we rotated the distal mountain cue closest to the hidden target
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Figure 5
Heading Error at Retrieval
AGING AND SPATIAL NAVIGATION STRATEGIES
925
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
location on a subset of the delayed probe trials. We reasoned that
those using a beacon strategy would rotate their memory response
commensurate to the rotation of the distal landmark. Spatial performance on the rotated mountain trials did not differ between
young and older adults, suggesting that neither age group was more
likely to rely single landmark during navigation. Moreover, performance on the rotated mountain trials predicted spatial distance
error on the delayed probe trials, and this association was independent of age. Taken together, our results suggest that observed age
differences in spatial memory could not be explained solely in terms
of a deficit in landmark-dependent navigation (cf. Colmant et al.,
2023; West et al., 2023).
It has been proposed that healthy older adults may preferentially
rely on geometric spatial cues over discrete landmarks to navigate.
Indeed, recent studies suggest that age differences in allocentric
navigation are eliminated when geometric cues, such as environmental boundaries, are available to guide navigation (Bécu et al.,
2020, 2023). We tested this idea by having a subset of young and
older adult participants navigate a version of the MWM environment that included a circular boundary wall, which served as a
geometric cue. Young and older adults were less likely to replicate
familiar paths when navigating from a novel start location in the
boundary condition compared with the no-boundary condition. That
is, both age groups were less likely to replicate a previously learned
path when geometric spatial cues were included within the environment. We also note that, within the immersive VR condition, age
differences in path replication were eliminated in the boundary
condition. We caution that this analysis was exploratory and should
thus be interpreted cautiously. Nevertheless, the pattern is largely
consistent with prior studies that suggest age differences in allocentric-based navigation strategies are attenuated when geometric
cues are available to guide navigation (Bécu et al., 2020, 2023; see
also Hill, 2023).
Inclusion of the boundary wall did not affect the tendency to
orient toward the discrete landmarks, regardless of age or VR
condition (Figure 5A, right panel). This result contrasts with findings
from a recent eye-tracking study that reported older adults spent
less time fixating on landmarks when geometric cues were present
(Bécu et al., 2023). We note that the circular boundary cue in our
study—which was selected to mimic the circular enclosures often
present in rodent (Eichenbaum et al., 1990; Gallagher et al., 2015;
Morris et al., 1982) and human (Daugherty et al., 2015; Gazova et
al., 2013; Iggena et al., 2023; Moffat et al., 2006) adaptations of the
MWM—differed from the types of asymmetric geometry cues
used in prior studies, such as the Y-maze (Bécu et al., 2023) and
rectangular enclosures (Bécu et al., 2023). Asymmetries in the
angles and lengths of rectangular boundaries convey both directional
and distance information, which may have been sufficient to guide
navigation even in the absence of discrete landmark cues. By contrast,
the circular wall and distal mountain cues used in our study provided
distinct yet complementary information about the environment. The
distal mountain cues could be used to infer relative directions within
the otherwise sparse environment but were too far (∼750 m) to allow
for distance estimations. The circular boundary wall, while directionally uninformative, could be used to estimate relative distances
within the navigable arena.
One possibility is that young and older adults use a combination
of landmark and geometric cues to orient, but only when the respective
cues provide complementary information about the environment, as
was the case in our boundary condition. This interpretation may
explain the performance advantage observed in both age groups when
navigating in the boundary condition, as indicated by reduced angular
target error (Figure 5B, right panel) and spatial distance error (Hill
et al., 2024) compared with the no-boundary condition. Consequently,
reliance on any given spatial cue to guide behavior is likely lessened
when alternative cues are also present to optimize spatial performance.
This may account for our observation that the correlation between
distance error (a proxy for optimal navigation performance) and
landmark-guided orientation (as assessed on the rotated mountain
trials) was significantly weakened by the presence of a boundary wall
in both young and older adults (Figure 4C).
The principal aim of the present study was to identify whether age
differences in navigation strategies are affected by the modality of
the virtual testing environment. Prior studies of aging and navigation
in humans have relied overwhelmingly on experimental paradigms
that assess wayfinding on desktop computers or mobile platforms
(Coutrot et al., 2018; Diersch & Wolbers, 2019). This type of
“desktop VR” approach offers several advantages, including relative
ease of implementation, minimal space requirements, reduced need
for specialized equipment, and compatibility with functional neuroimaging environments, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging.
Desktop VR is also effective when examining many of the purely
cognitive phenomena that support successful navigation, such as spatial
memory or landmark perception. A major limitation of desktop VR is
its restriction of natural body-based movements and sensorimotor
feedback (e.g., vestibular, proprioceptive, motor efference copy), which
are critical for real-world navigation (Hill & Ekstrom, 2025; Plácido et
al., 2022). Furthermore, cross-sectional studies of navigation may be
confounded by group differences in visuomotor dexterity and/or prior
experience with computerized gaming equipment (Charness & Boot,
2022; Hill et al., 2024). The ability to freely walk and rotate one’s body
in an immersive VR environment can provide a more ecologically valid
platform for capturing dynamic cognitive and sensorimotor interactions during more naturalistic navigation behavior (Hill & Ekstrom,
2025) in a carefully controlled laboratory environment.
Nevertheless, we cannot rule out the possibility that age differences in prior exposure to VR headsets and other forms of immersive media may have influenced the observed age differences in
navigation strategies, particularly path replication. Factors such as
the restricted field of view (∼110° horizontal FoV in the VR headset
vs. ∼180° in real-world binocular vision) or mild discomfort from
dizziness or eye strain may have disproportionately affected navigation performance in the older adult group. Examining spatial
behavior in real-world contexts could help address some of the
limitations of immersive VR. We note though that while this
approach would offer the highest ecological validity, it would also
sacrifice the experimental control and manipulation achievable
when using immersive VR techniques in a controlled laboratory
setting. We acknowledge that many of the foregoing interpretations
are based on nonsignificant effects of age on allocentric navigation
and that null results do not necessarily reflect the true absence of an
effect. Follow-up studies are therefore necessary to independently
replicate and validate our findings. We are encouraged, however,
that the present findings are largely consistent with those reported
by a previous study from our laboratory that failed to identify age
differences in putative allocentric strategy preferences in a separate
926
HILL ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
sample of young and older adults navigating in immersive VR
(McAvan et al., 2021). We also note that null effects of age on
spatial strategy were typically supported by strong evidence for the
null based on Bayesian statistics.
To summarize, spatial navigation is a complex and multifaceted
behavior that draws on multiple parallel cognitive, sensory, and
motor systems (Ekstrom & Hill, 2023). Past work has suggested that
impaired spatial navigation in older age may arise primarily from an
allocentric deficit. As we have described above, however, allocentric and egocentric navigation strategies are difficult to isolate,
and there is also growing evidence that allocentric and egocentric
sensory signals elicited during navigation recruit partially overlapping brain circuits (for review, see Wang et al., 2020), further
complicating attempts to dichotomize these variables. Here, we
show that older adults were more likely than young individuals to
replicate a familiar path, even when this type of route-based egocentric strategy was less efficient and more likely to produce spatial
errors. This age difference was significantly attenuated, however,
when geometric and body-based motor and vestibular cues were
available during navigation. Critically, we did not identify any
evidence to suggest that spatial errors in older age stem from a
failure to attend to stable landmarks within the environment, which
is a key component of putative allocentric navigation. These results
underscore the limitations of using a simple allocentric–egocentric
dichotomy to explain the complexity of spatial behaviors observed
in older age.
References
Albert, S. M., & Duffy, J. (2012). Differences in risk aversion between young
and older adults. Neuroscience and Neuroeconomics, 2012(1), Article 3.
https://doi.org/10.2147/NAN.S27184
Barnes, C. A., Nadel, L., & Honig, W. K. (1980). Spatial memory deficit in
senescent rats. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 34(1), 29–39. https://
doi.org/10.1037/h0081022
Bécu, M., Sheynikhovich, D., Ramanoël, S., Tatur, G., Ozier-Lafontaine, A.,
Authié, C. N., Sahel, J.-A., & Arleo, A. (2023). Landmark-based spatial
navigation across the human lifespan. eLife, 12, Article e81318. https://
doi.org/10.7554/eLife.81318
Bécu, M., Sheynikhovich, D., Tatur, G., Agathos, C. P., Bologna, L. L.,
Sahel, J.-A., & Arleo, A. (2020). Age-related preference for geometric
spatial cues during real-world navigation. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(1),
88–99. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0718-z
Benton, A. L. (1968). Differential behavioral effects in frontal lobe disease.
Neuropsychologia, 6(1), 53–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/0028-3932(68)
90038-9
Bondi, M. W., Jak, A. J., Delano-Wood, L., Jacobson, M. W., Delis, D. C., &
Salmon, D. P. (2008). Neuropsychological contributions to the early
identification of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychology Review, 18(1),
73–90. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-008-9054-1
Campbell, M. G., Ocko, S. A., Mallory, C. S., Low, I. I. C., Ganguli, S., &
Giocomo, L. M. (2018). Principles governing the integration of landmark
and self-motion cues in entorhinal cortical codes for navigation. Nature
Neuroscience, 21(8), 1096–1106. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-
0189-y
Charness, N., & Boot, W. R. (2022). A grand challenge for psychology:
Reducing the age-related digital divide. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 31(2), 187–193. https://doi.org/10.1177/09637214211068144
Colmant, L., Bierbrauer, A., Bellaali, Y., Kunz, L., Van Dongen, J., Sleegers,
K., Axmacher, N., Lefèvre, P., & Hanseeuw, B. (2023). Dissociating
effects of aging and genetic risk of sporadic Alzheimer’s disease on path
integration. Neurobiology of Aging, 131, 170–181. https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2023.07.025
Colombo, D., Serino, S., Tuena, C., Pedroli, E., Dakanalis, A., Cipresso, P.,
& Riva, G. (2017). Egocentric and allocentric spatial reference frames in
aging: A systematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 80,
605–621. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.07.012
Coutrot, A., Silva, R., Manley, E., De Cothi, W., Sami, S., Bohbot, V. D.,
Wiener, J. M., Hölscher, C., Dalton, R. C., Hornberger, M., & Spiers, H. J.
(2018). Global determinants of navigation ability. Current Biology,
28(17), 2861–2866. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.06.009
Cremers, J. (2020). bpnreg: Bayesian projected normal regression models
for circular data (R package Version 2.0.1). https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=bpnreg
Cremers, J., & Klugkist, I. (2018). One direction? A tutorial for circular
data analysis using R with examples in cognitive psychology. Frontiers
in Psychology, 9, Article 2040. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018
.02040
Cremers, J., Mulder, K. T., & Klugkist, I. (2018). Circular interpretation of
regression coefficients. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical
Psychology, 71(1), 75–95. https://doi.org/10.1111/bmsp.12108
Daugherty, A. M., & Raz, N. (2017). A virtual water maze revisited: Twoyear changes in navigation performance and their neural correlates in
healthy adults. NeuroImage, 146, 492–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neu
roimage.2016.09.044
Daugherty, A. M., Yuan, P., Dahle, C. L., Bender, A. R., Yang, Y., & Raz, N.
(2015). Path complexity in virtual water maze navigation: Differential
associations with age, sex, and regional brain volume. Cerebral Cortex,
25(9), 3122–3131. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu107
Delis, D. C., Kramer, J. H., Kaplan, E., & Ober, B. A. (2000). California
verbal learning test (2nd ed.). The Psychological Corportation.
Diersch, N., & Wolbers, T. (2019). The potential of virtual reality for
spatial navigation research across the adult lifespan. Journal of
Experimental Biology, 222(Suppl_1), jeb187252. https://doi.org/10
.1242/jeb.187252
Du, Y. K., McAvan, A. S., Zheng, J., & Ekstrom, A. D. (2023). Spatial
memory distortions for the shapes of walked paths occur in violation of
physically experienced geometry. PLOS ONE, 18(2), Article e0281739.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0281739
Eichenbaum, H., Stewart, C., & Morris, R. G. (1990). Hippocampal
representation in place learning. The Journal of Neuroscience, 10(11),
3531–3542. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.10-11-03531.1990
Ekstrom, A. D., Arnold, A. E. G. F., & Iaria, G. (2014). A critical review of
the allocentric spatial representation and its neural underpinnings: Toward
a network-based perspective. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, Article
803. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00803
Ekstrom, A. D., & Hill, P. F. (2023). Spatial navigation and memory: A
review of the similarities and differences relevant to brain models and
age. Neuron, 111(7), 1037–1049. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.20
23.03.001
Frank, C. C., & Seaman, K. L. (2023). Aging, uncertainty, and decision
making—A review. Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience,
23(3), 773–787. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-023-01064-w
Gallagher, M., Burwell, R., & Burchinal, M. (2015). Severity of spatial
learning impairment in aging: Development of a learning index for performance in the Morris water maze. Behavioral Neuroscience, 129(4),
540–548. https://doi.org/10.1037/bne0000080
Gazova, I., Laczó, J., Rubinova, E., Mokrisova, I., Hyncicova, E., Andel, R.,
Vyhnalek, M., Sheardova, K., Coulson, E. J., & Hort, J. (2013). Spatial
navigation in young versus older adults. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience,
5, Article 94. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2013.00094
Giorgino, T. (2009). Computing and visualizing dynamic time warping
alignments in R: The dtw package. Journal of Statistical Software, 31(7),
1–24. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v031.i07
AGING AND SPATIAL NAVIGATION STRATEGIES
927
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Goodglass, H., Kaplan, E., & Barresi, B. (2001). The assessment of aphasia
and related disorders. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Greenhouse, S. W., & Geisser, S. (1959). On methods in the analysis of
profile data. Psychometrika, 24(2), 95–112. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02
289823
Harris, M. A., Wiener, J. M., & Wolbers, T. (2012). Aging specifically
impairs switching to an allocentric navigational strategy. Frontiers in
Aging Neuroscience, 4, Article 29. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.20
12.00029
Harris, M. A., & Wolbers, T. (2014). How age-related strategy switching
deficits affect wayfinding in complex environments. Neurobiology of
Aging, 35(5), 1095–1102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013
.10.086
Hill, P. F. (2023). When landmarks are not enough. eLife, 12, Article e87771.
https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.87771
Hill, P. F. (2025). AgingNavigationVR_mountains2 [Data set]. Open Science
Framework. https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/5VBZN
Hill, P. F., Bermudez, S., McAvan, A. S., Garren, J. D., Grilli, M. D., Barnes,
C. A., & Ekstrom, A. D. (2024). Age differences in spatial memory are
mitigated during naturalistic navigation. Aging, Neuropsychology, and
Cognition, 31(6), 1106–1130. https://doi.org/10.1080/13825585.2024
.2326244
Hill, P. F., & Ekstrom, A. D. (2025). A cognitive-motor framework for
spatial navigation in aging and early-stage Alzheimer’s disease. Cortex,
185, 133–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2025.02.003
Huffman, D. J., & Ekstrom, A. D. (2021). An important step toward
understanding the role of body-based cues on human spatial memory for
large-scale environments. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 33(2), 167–
179. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01653
Iaria, G., Palermo, L., Committeri, G., & Barton, J. J. S. (2009). Age differences
in the formation and use of cognitive maps. Behavioural Brain Research,
196(2), 187–191. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2008.08.040
Iaria, G., Petrides, M., Dagher, A., Pike, B., & Bohbot, V. D. (2003).
Cognitive strategies dependent on the hippocampus and caudate nucleus in
human navigation: Variability and change with practice. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 23(13), 5945–5952. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI
.23-13-05945.2003
Iggena, D., Jeung, S., Maier, P. M., Ploner, C. J., Gramann, K., & Finke, C.
(2023). Multisensory input modulates memory-guided spatial navigation
in humans. Communications Biology, 6(1), Article 1167. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s42003-023-05522-6
Jak, A. J., Bondi, M. W., Delano-Wood, L., Wierenga, C., Corey-Bloom, J.,
Salmon, D. P., & Delis, D. C. (2009). Quantification of five neuropsychological approaches to defining mild cognitive impairment. The American
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 17(5), 368–375. https://doi.org/10.1097/
JGP.0b013e31819431d5
Jeffreys, H. (1961). Theory of probability (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.
Johnsen, S. H. W., & Rytter, H. M. (2021). Dissociating spatial strategies in
animal research: Critical methodological review with focus on egocentric
navigation and the hippocampus. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews, 126, 57–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.03.022
Kolarik, B. S., Baer, T., Shahlaie, K., Yonelinas, A. P., & Ekstrom, A. D.
(2018). Close but no cigar: Spatial precision deficits following medial
temporal lobe lesions provide novel insight into theoretical models of
navigation and memory. Hippocampus, 28(1), 31–41. https://doi.org/10
.1002/hipo.22801
Lenth, R. (2018). Emmeans: Estimated marginal means, aka least-squares
means. R Package Version 1.3.0. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=e
mmeans
Lester, A. W., Moffat, S. D., Wiener, J. M., Barnes, C. A., & Wolbers, T.
(2017). The aging navigational system. Neuron, 95(5), 1019–1035. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.06.037
Li, A. W. Y., & King, J. (2019). Spatial memory and navigation in ageing: A
systematic review of MRI and fMRI studies in healthy participants.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 103, 33–49. https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.05.005
McAvan, A. S., Du, Y. K., Oyao, A., Doner, S., Grilli, M. D., & Ekstrom, A.
(2021). Older adults show reduced spatial precision but preserved strategy-use during spatial navigation involving body-based cues. Frontiers in
Aging Neuroscience, 13, Article 640188. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi
.2021.640188
Merhav, M., & Wolbers, T. (2019). Aging and spatial cues influence the
updating of navigational memories. Scientific Reports, 9(1), Article 11469.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47971-2
Moffat, S. D., Elkins, W., & Resnick, S. M. (2006). Age differences in
the neural systems supporting human allocentric spatial navigation.
Neurobiology of Aging, 27(7), 965–972. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro
biolaging.2005.05.011
Moffat, S. D., Kennedy, K. M., Rodrigue, K. M., & Raz, N. (2007).
Extrahippocampal contributions to age differences in human spatial
navigation. Cerebral Cortex, 17(6), 1274–1282. https://doi.org/10.1093/
cercor/bhl036
Moffat, S. D., & Resnick, S. M. (2002). Effects of age on virtual
environment place navigation and allocentric cognitive mapping.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 116(5), 851–859. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0735-7044.116.5.851
Morey, R. D., Rouder, J. N., Jamil, T., Urbanek, S., Forner, K., & Ly, A.
(2022). BayesFactor: Computation of Bayes factors for common designs.
https://richarddmorey.github.io/BayesFactor/
Morris, R. G. M., Garrud, P., Rawlins, J. N. P., & O’Keefe, J. (1982). Place
navigation impaired in rats with hippocampal lesions. Nature, 297(5868),
681–683. https://doi.org/10.1038/297681a0
O’Keefe, J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The hippocampus as a cognitive map.
Oxford University Press.
Plácido, J., de Almeida, C. A. B., Ferreira, J. V., de Oliveira Silva, F.,
Monteiro-Junior, R. S., Tangen, G. G., Laks, J., & Deslandes, A. C.
(2022). Spatial navigation in older adults with mild cognitive impairment
and dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Experimental
Gerontology, 165, 111852. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2022.111852
R Core Team. (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. http://www.R-proje
ct.org/
Reitan, R. M., & Wolfson, D. (1985). The Halstead-Reitan neuropsychological
test battery: Therapy and clinical interpretation. Neuropsychology Press.
Rey, A. (1941). L’examen psychologique dans les cas d’encéphalopathie
traumatique. (Les problems.) [The psychological examination in cases
of traumatic encepholopathy. Problems]. Archives de Psychologie, 28,
215–285.
Rosenzweig, E. S., Redish, A. D., McNaughton, B. L., & Barnes, C. A. (2003).
Hippocampal map realignment and spatial learning. Nature Neuroscience,
6(6), 609–615. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1053
Siegel, A. W., & White, S. H. (1975). The development of spatial
representations of large-scale environments. Advances in Child Development and Behavior, 10, 9–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-
2407(08)60007-5
Singmann, H., Bolker, B., Westfall, J., & Aust, F. (2016). Afex: Analysis of
factorial experiments (R package Version 0.22-1). https://CRAN.R-proje
ct.org/package=afex
Spreen, O., & Benton, A. L. (1977). Neurosensory center comprehensive
examination for aphasia. Neuropsychology Laboratory.
Spreng, R. N., & Turner, G. R. (2021). From exploration to exploitation:
A shifting mental mode in late life development. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 25(12), 1058–1071. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2021.09
.001
928
HILL ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Starrett, M. J., McAvan, A. S., Huffman, D. J., Stokes, J. D., Kyle, C. T.,
Smuda, D. N., Kolarik, B. S., Laczko, J., & Ekstrom, A. D. (2021).
Landmarks: A solution for spatial navigation and memory experiments in
virtual reality. Behavior Research Methods, 53(3), 1046–1059. https://
doi.org/10.3758/s13428-020-01481-6
Tuena, C., Riva, G., Murru, I., Campana, L., Goulene, K. M., Pedroli, E., &
Stramba-Badiale, M. (2022). Contribution of cognitive and bodily navigation cues to egocentric and allocentric spatial memory in hallucinations
due to Parkinson’s disease: A case report. Frontiers in Behavioral
Neuroscience, 16, Article 992498. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2022
.992498
Waller, D., & Lippa, Y. (2007). Landmarks as beacons and associative cues:
Their role in route learning. Memory & Cognition, 35(5), 910–924. https://
doi.org/10.3758/BF03193465
Wang, C., Chen, X., & Knierim, J. J. (2020). Egocentric and allocentric representations of space in the rodent brain. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
60, 12–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2019.11.005
Wechsler, D. (2009). Wechsler memory scale (4th ed.). The Psychological
Corporation.
West, G. L., Patai, Z. E., Coutrot, A., Hornberger, M., Bohbot, V. D., &
Spiers, H. J. (2023). Landmark-dependent navigation strategy declines
across the human life-span: Evidence from over 37,000 participants.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 35(3), 452–467. https://doi.org/10
.1162/jocn_a_01956
Wiener, J. M., de Condappa, O., Harris, M. A., & Wolbers, T. (2013).
Maladaptive bias for extrahippocampal navigation strategies in aging
humans. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(14), 6012–6017. https://doi.org/
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0717-12.2013
Wolbers, T., & Wiener, J. M. (2014). Challenges for identifying the neural
mechanisms that support spatial navigation: The impact of spatial scale.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, Article 571. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2014.00571
Zhong, J. Y., Magnusson, K. R., Swarts, M. E., Clendinen, C. A., Reynolds,
N. C., & Moffat, S. D. (2017). The application of a rodent-based Morris
water maze (MWM) protocol to an investigation of age-related differences
in human spatial learning. Behavioral Neuroscience, 131(6), 470–482.
https://doi.org/10.1037/bne0000219
Received October 31, 2024
Revision received June 20, 2025
Accepted June 23, 2025 ▪
Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.
