Making Guesses During Learning Can Be Beneficial for Older Adults’ Memory
Oliver Kliegl, Johannes Bartl, and Karl-Heinz T. Bäuml
Department of Experimental Psychology, Regensburg University
When young adults complete a pretest (e.g., star—?) before to-be-learned material is studied (e.g., star—
night), their recall of the material is typically enhanced on a subsequent final test compared to material
studied without initial pretesting. The present two experiments investigated whether this pretesting effect
arises also in older adults and is modulated in size when repeated guessing attempts are made during
pretesting. Sixty young adults (mean age = 24.5 years) and 60 older adults (mean age = 68.6 years) took part
in Experiment 1, while 54 young adults (mean age = 21.8 years) and 54 older adults (mean age = 66.6 years)
took part in Experiment 2. Results showed that, like young adults, older adults can benefit from a single
guessing attempt made during pretesting, both when weakly associated word pairs (Experiment 1) and prose
passages (Experiment 2) were used as study material. However, multiple guessing attempts during pretesting led to an additional recall benefit when word pairs but not when prose passages had been studied.
Experiment 2 also examined possible transfer effects of pretesting and showed a lack of transfer to
previously studied but untested information, for both young and older adults. The results are discussed with
respect to prominent accounts of the pretesting effect.
Public Significance Statement
Previous research has shown that taking a test on information (e.g., on a topic such as the former U.S.
President Woodrow Wilson) even before studying the information can improve later recall on an
assessment test. We show that such pretesting can increase correct recall and decrease incorrect recall for
both young and older adults and, under some conditions, can lead to further improvements when
multiple unique guesses are made during the pretest. The findings suggest that pretesting may be an
effective learning technique not only for young adults but also for older adults.
Keywords: testing effect, pretesting effect, young and older adults, elaboration account, cue-overload
principle
Testing during learning can promote memory. Over the last 2
decades, research on the testing effect has impressively shown that
memory tests not only serve to determine the current level of
knowledge but also represent learning events themselves. Retrieval
practice of previously encoded information indeed often causes
better retention of this information in a subsequent final test than
does restudy of the information, with a wide variety of both
laboratory and classroom studies demonstrating that the testing
effect is a robust memory phenomenon (for reviews, see Karpicke,
2017; Rowland, 2014).
Strikingly, prior work on the pretesting effect has shown that
testing even before the material to be learned is exposed for study
can benefit later retention of the material for young adults (for
reviews, see Kornell & Vaughn, 2016; Pan & Carpenter, 2023). In
a typical pretesting effect task, participants engage in a series of
study-only trials in which they are asked to learn weakly associated
cue-target pairs (e.g., frog–pond) which are randomly intermixed
with a series of pretest trials in which, at first, only the cue item of a
pair is presented for a few seconds and the target item has to be
guessed (plate–?) before it is revealed (plate–fork). On a later final
test, in which participants are presented, one by one, with all prior
cue items and asked to recall the associated target item (plate–?),
memory performance is usually better for target items that were
originally pretested compared to target items that were studied
only. The pretesting effect even arises if only those trials in which
participants made an incorrect guess during pretesting are included
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
This article was published Online First July 31, 2025.
Hannes Zacher served as action editor.
Oliver Kliegl https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7730-4019
The ideas and data appearing in the article have not been disseminated
before. All study materials and data have been made publicly available on the
Open Science Framework and can be found at https://osf.io/uge3r/. This work
was supported by a grant from the German Research Foundation (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft) awarded to Oliver Kliegl (Grant KL 2967/2-1).
Oliver Kliegl played a lead role in conceptualization, data curation,
formal analysis, funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, project
administration, supervision, validation, visualization, and writing–original
draft and an equal role in writing–review and editing. Johannes Bartl played
a supporting role in investigation and writing–review and editing. KarlHeinz T. Bäuml played a lead role in resources, a supporting role in
conceptualization, funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, and
project administration, and an equal role in writing–review and editing.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Oliver
Kliegl, Department of Experimental Psychology, Regensburg University,
Universitaetsstrasse 31, 93040 Regensburg, Germany. Email: oliver.
kliegl@ur.de
Psychology and Aging
© 2025 American Psychological Association 2025, Vol. 40, No. 8, 902–912
ISSN: 0882-7974 https://doi.org/10.1037/pag0000929
902
MAKING GUESSES DURING LEARNING CAN BE BENEFICIAL
903
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
in further analyses (e.g., Kornell et al., 2009), which suggests that
learning from errors is indeed possible. Research over the past
15 years has demonstrated the robustness of the pretesting effect
for a variety of study materials—including weakly associated word
pairs, videos, trivia questions, and foreign language vocabulary—
in both laboratory and classroom settings (for reviews, see Chan
et al., 2018; St. Hilaire et al., 2024).
One prominent explanation of the pretesting effect is the elaboration hypothesis (e.g., Huelser & Metcalfe, 2012). This account
proposes that when subjects are shown a cue item (plate–?) in an
initial pretest and are asked to guess the target item, memory representations that are semantically related to the cue item—and may
include items such as table, spoon, knife—become activated and
linked to the pair when correct-answer feedback is given a few
seconds later. When, on the final test, the cue item is provided
and the target item has to be produced, these additional memory
representations—among which is also the incorrect guess from the
pretest—may act as semantic mediators which facilitate recall of the
target item, thereby enabling the pretesting effect. Huelser and
Metcalfe provided support for the elaboration account by showing
that pretests not only enhance later memory of the target item
but also increase response times for the target items. In particular,
attempting to retrieve an originally pretested item may initially result
in the retrieval of mediating memory representations, thereby
slowing down access to the target item. Further evidence in favor of
the account comes from a recent study showing that the benefits of
pretesting on later recall performance were greater when three initial
guessing attempts were made than when only one guessing attempt
was made (Kliegl et al., 2024). Multiple unique guesses may induce
more elaborations than only a single guess and could act as additional mediating information through which retrieval of the target
information is enabled on the later test, thus leading to the observed
increase in the size of the pretesting effect.
At first glance, it may be surprising that making mistakes during
learning can boost memory. In fact, a large body of classic research
on errorless learning has demonstrated that allowing for errors
during the learning process can hinder the retention of information
(e.g., Baddeley & Wilson, 1994; Skinner, 1957). For decades,
educators therefore have been advocating for the use of errorless
learning as a critical educational tool, by emphasizing the importance of creating study conditions which eliminate or minimize
errors in any learning contexts (e.g., Duker, 1981; Keel & Gast,
1992). Furthermore, clinicians have recommended errorless learning
as an effective learning method for those with memory impairments,
including older adults, or individuals with amnesia or dementia (for a
review, see Clare & Jones, 2008). The errorless learning perspective
also aligns well with a variety of memory models which include the
cue-overload principle (e.g., Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981; Watkins &
Watkins, 1975). The principle asserts that the probability of retrieving
information decreases the more information gets linked to an associated cue item. Since the added information can also involve erroneous guessing attempts produced on the pretest, the guesses may
interfere with the retrieval of target information on the final test,
therefore decreasing memory of the target item.
A number of studies indeed have found that pretesting older
adults can impair their later recall performance (e.g., Wilson et al.,
1994), which, at first glance, seems to suggest that pretesting may
be generally beneficial only for younger adults. However, these
earlier studies have typically used study material for which the
subject-generated error was semantically unrelated to the correct
response, for example, participants may be presented with a word
stem such as “qu___” and guess the word “queen” before they learn
that the correct response is “quote.” Consistently, prior studies have
found also for young adults that the pretesting effect can be reduced or
even reversed when the generated errors are unrelated to the correct
response (e.g., Zawadzka & Hanczakowski, 2019). This finding is in
line with the elaboration account since under such circumstances
it should be difficult for participants to properly integrate the guess
with the cue-target pair, so that the guess may hinder rather than help
access to the target item on the final test.
Consequently, the suggestion arising from prior work that young,
but not older, adults can benefit from pretesting may be due to the
fact that studies with young adults have tended to use study materials
that allow for better integration of the generated errors with the
target information. In support of this possibility, Cyr and Anderson
(2012, 2015) showed that, in both young and older adults, pretesting
was able to boost subsequent correct recall and source memory
when during initial acquisition, conceptual cues (i.e., category
names such as “fruit”) were presented and participants were asked to
guess the associated target item. These researchers also showed that
when a lexical cue was presented during acquisition, that is, a word
stem such as “fr___” and the word had to be guessed, neither young
nor older adults benefited from such pretesting (Cyr & Anderson,
2015). Since lexical cues usually lead to guesses that are unrelated
to the target items (e.g., a participant may guess the word friend with
the correct answer being frozen), the conclusion appears to be that
older adults can benefit from pretesting as much as young adults as
long as conceptual cues are used during pretesting.
Such conclusion might be premature, however. The one reason is
that Cyr and Anderson (2012, 2015) did not isolate the effects of
initial erroneous guesses on later recall performance. Rather, final
test performance in the two studies was based on trials for which the
target items were and were not guessed correctly during pretesting.
The two studies also did not report how often correct guesses were
made on the initial pretest trials and how common the target items
were for a given category. Including pairs for which correct guesses
were made initially makes it impossible to isolate the effects of
initially generated errors on later recall performance (for a more
detailed discussion of the issue, see Kornell et al., 2009). Therefore,
one of the major aims of the present study was to investigate whether
older adults can still benefit from pretesting when all trials on which
correct guesses were made during pretesting are not included in the
analysis of final test performance. Furthermore, the present two
experiments employed study material for which the chance of
correct guessing is relatively low (i.e., ≤5%).
The second reason is that the two Cyr and Anderson (2012, 2015)
studies always had participants make two guesses on each pretest
trial. It, therefore, remains to be investigated whether a single guessing
attempt can be sufficient to produce the pretesting effect in older
adults, and, in particular, whether the magnitude of the pretesting effect
in older adults increases with the number of initial guesses, as it does
in younger adults. Since older adults have been shown to be more
vulnerable to memory interference than young adults (e.g., Kliegl et
al., 2019), it is possible that multiple guesses made during pretesting
might impede, rather than facilitate, retrieval of the target information
on the final test. The present study thus examined whether initial
guessing can lead to parallel benefits in young and older adults that go
beyond demonstrating the mere existence of a pretesting effect.
904
KLIEGL, BARTL, AND BÄUML
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
The Present Study
Two experiments were conducted to compare the effects of pretesting on later recall performance between young and older adults.
While Experiment 1 used weakly related word pairs (frog—pond) as
study material, Experiment 2 used more educationally relevant prose
passages. The first goal of the two experiments was to examine whether
older participants can benefit from pretesting in the typical pretest
situation in which only one initial guessing attempt is made. The
second goal was to replicate prior findings for young adults that the
magnitude of the pretesting effect can increase when multiple initial
guesses are made and to determine whether this benefit of repeated
guessing attempts generalizes to older adults. Since older adults are
particularly vulnerable to interference from competing items (e.g.,
Kliegl et al., 2019), multiple additional guessing attempts indeed may
impede, rather than promote, access to the target information on the
final test in this age group. For instance, older adults may be able to use
one guessing attempt as a stepping stone to access the target information on the later test, but two additional guessing attempts may not
be properly integrated with the cue-target pair and rather serve as a
source of interference when the target information needs to be
retrieved. The present study examined this possibility. The third goal
was to determine whether initial guessing can induce memory transfer
to previously studied material that is not pretested. This issue will be
examined in Experiment 2 which uses prose passages as study material
and in which, during acquisition of a passage, the presentation of
untested material occurs in close temporal proximity to the pretests.
The assumption is that potentially short-lived elaboration processes
might spill over to the untested material and thus boost later retention of
the untested material.
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 investigated for both young and older adults the
effects of a single initial guessing attempt and of three initial guessing
attempts on subsequent recall performance when using weakly
associated word pairs as study material. Therefore, the two age groups
were either presented with both the cue item and target item of a pair
from the beginning of the trial (study-only condition), or they were
only provided with the cue item and instructed to make one guess (oneguess condition) or three guesses (three-guesses condition) before the
target item was shown. The study material consisted of weakly linked
cue-target pairs (e.g., frog—pond). In the study-only condition, the
complete word pair was presented intact for 10 s (e.g., frog—pond). In
the one-guess condition, only the cue item was provided for the first 5 s
of a trial (e.g., frog—?) and a single guess had to be made within that
time span before the intact word pair was shown for another 5 s. The
three-guesses condition was similar to the one-guess condition, with
the critical difference that, after providing their first guess, a second
and a third guess had to be made. Participants were allotted 5 s each for
these additional guesses. After this acquisition phase, a final test was
conducted on which memory of all target items was assessed (e.g.,
frog—?). Both correct recall and commission errors (i.e., intrusions)
were measured on this final test.
Method
Transparency and Openness
The deidentified data on which the study conclusions are based
and the materials are available. The link to access this information is
provided in the author note. The analytic code is not available since
all statistical analyses reported in the article can be reproduced on
the basis of the details given in the Method sections of Experiments
1 and 2. We report how we determined our sample size, any data
exclusions, all manipulations, and all measures. None of the reported experiments have been preregistered.
Participants
Optimal sample sizes for Experiments 1 and 2 were assessed with
a power analysis using the G*Power software (Version 3.1.9.2; Faul
et al., 2009). On the basis of an estimate of the meta-analytic effect
size of the pretesting effect (Hedge’s g = 0.44, Boustani & Shanks,
2022), the analysis revealed that 43 subjects were required overall
when setting α to .05 and β to .20. To detect a potentially smaller
benefit of pretesting in older adults, we recruited a higher number of
participants for each age group: The final sample consisted of 60
young adults with a mean age of 24.5 years (44 female, 16 male,
zero diverse) and 60 older adults with a mean age of 68.6 years (41
female, 19 male, zero diverse). We recruited young adults from
Regensburg University and older adults from the community. All
data were collected between April 2023 and August 2023. All
participants were Caucasian and gave their spoken informed
consent. Young participants were compensated either financially
or earned some course credit for their participation. Older participants all received a compensatory amount of money for their
participation. Compared to young adults, older adults performed
significantly worse in the Mini Mental State Examination (Folstein
et al., 1975; young adults: 29.5; older adults: 28.1), t(118) = 7.512,
p < .001, Cohen’s d = 1.37, and the digit span task (young adults:
15.4; older adults: 13.3), t(118) = 4.32, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 0.79,
but significantly better in the MWT-B (Mehrfachwahl Wortschatz
Test [multiple-choice vocabulary intelligence test]; Lehrl, 2005), a
German vocabulary test that assesses crystallized intelligence
(young adults: 27.7; older adults: 31.0), t(118) = 6.09, p < .001,
Cohen’s d = 1.11.
Material
Sixty weakly related word pairs (e.g., plate—fork, frog—pond)
were employed as study material. We used cue-target pairs from the
Nelson et al.’s (1998) norms and selected them on the basis of a
relatively narrow forward association strength of .051 to .053. The
average association strength was .052, meaning that participants in
the Nelson et al.’s study came up with a target item as their first
associate approximately 5% of the time when a given cue item was
shown. All 60 pairs were translated into German and divided into
three subsets of 20 pairs each. Each subset was applied equally often
in each of the experimental conditions.1
Design
The experiment used a mixed design with the between-subjects
factor AGE GROUP (young adults vs. older adults) and the withinsubjects factor TYPE OF PRACTICE (study only vs. one guess vs. three
guesses). TYPE OF PRACTICE was manipulated by either presenting the
cue-target pairs intact from the beginning of the trial (study-only
1 The study materials and data can be found at https://osf.io/uge3r/.
MAKING GUESSES DURING LEARNING CAN BE BENEFICIAL
905
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
condition), or by providing only the cue item and having participants
come up with one guess (one-guess condition) or three unique
guesses (three-guesses condition) before revealing the target item.
Procedure
The protocol employed in this study was deemed exempt by the
ethical review board of Regensburg university. The experiments
were carried out in accordance with the provisions of the World
Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. For both young and
older participants, the experiment consisted of three phases: an
acquisition phase, a distractor phase, and a final test phase. While all
60 word pairs were presented during the initial acquisition phase,
only 20 of these pairs were shown intact from the start of a trial. In
these study-only trials, the cue-target pair was presented for 10 s
(plate—fork) and could therefore be encoded immediately. All of
the remaining 40 trials involved some form of pretesting. Twenty of
the pairs were allocated to one-guess trials in which, within a time
frame of 5 s, the target item had to be guessed from the cue item
(e.g., tradition—?). Immediately prior to the start of each trial, a tone
was presented for 0.5 s to indicate that a guessing attempt had to be
produced. The remaining 20 pairs were allocated to three-guesses
trials in which subjects were given two further 5 s periods to make
the additional guesses. Presentation of the tone occurred immediately prior to the start of each 5-s period to indicate that another
guessing attempt was required. Subjects were not informed at the
beginning of each trial how many guesses they would have to make.
At the end of the one-guess and three-guesses trials, the complete
cue-target pairs were presented for 5 s (e.g., tradition—Christmas).
Presentation order of the word pairs was random for all participants.
There was no consequence if participants were unable to make a
guess within the 5 s time frame. Indeed, prior work has shown that
final test recall is largely unaffected by whether people are forced
to guess in the pretest or are allowed to leave answers blank (Kang
et al., 2011; Metcalfe & Kornell, 2007).
After the acquisition phase, subjects engaged in the standard
progressive matrices task (Raven et al., 2000) as a distractor activity
for 5 min before the final test was conducted. In this test, the cue
items of all 60 word pairs were shown in randomized order for 10 s
each. At the beginning of each 10 s period, the 0.5 s tone was
presented to indicate to participants that they should provide the
corresponding target item. Participants did not receive any feedback
on this final test.
Results
Initial Pretest
For both Experiments 1 and 2, we applied the data aligned rank
transform (ART) procedure of the ARTool package (Kay et al.,
2021; Wobbrock et al., 2011) using R (Version 2024.12.1) to
conduct nonparametric analyses of variance (ANOVAs) on the
pretest and final test data.2 A 2 × 2 ANOVA of the between-subjects
factor AGE GROUP (young vs. older adults) and the within-subjects
factor TYPE OF PRACTICE (one guess vs. three guesses) on percentage
of correct guesses during the initial pretest showed significant main
effects of AGE GROUP, F(1, 118) = 21.53, p < .001, η2 p = .15, and TYPE
2 p
2 p
OF PRACTICE, F(1, 118) = 57.55, p < .001, η2 p = .33, reflecting that,
overall, young adults made more correct guesses than older adults
2 p
(7.0% vs. 4.0%) and more correct guesses were made for item pairs
for which participants were allowed to make three guessing attempts, relative to one guessing attempt (7.9% vs. 3.1%). There was
also a significant interaction between factors, F(1, 118) = 10.15, p =
.001, η2 p = .08. While planned comparisons using the Wilcoxon
signed-rank test showed that, relative to the one-guess condition,
correct guesses were increased in the three-guesses condition for
both age groups, all ps ≤ .002, this difference was more pronounced
in young than older adults (6.8% vs. 2.8%).
Final Test
Correct Recall. Figure 1A shows the percentage of correctly
recalled items on the final test as a function of the between-subjects
factor AGE GROUP (young adults vs. older adults) and the withinsubjects factor TYPE OF PRACTICE (study only vs. one guess vs. three
guesses). A 2 × 3 ANOVA of the between-subjects factor AGE GROUP
(young vs. older adults) and the within-subjects factor TYPE OF
PRACTICE (study only vs. one guess vs. three guesses) on percentage
of correct responses on the final test revealed significant main effects
of AGE GROUP, F(1, 118) = 70.84, p < .001, η2 p = .38, and TYPE OF
2 p
2 p
2 p
PRACTICE, F(2, 236) = 33.09, p < .001, η2 p = .22, reflecting that,
overall, recall of older adults was lower than of young adults (42.1%
vs. 68.2%) and that, overall, recall performance increased with
number of initial guessing attempts (47.9% vs. 55.9% vs. 61.7%).
Critically, there was no significant interaction between the two
factors, F(2, 236) < 1, η2 p = .0006, suggesting that the effects of TYPE
OF PRACTICE did not differ reliably for the two age groups.
Two separate 2 × 2 mixed ANOVAs of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF
PRACTICE on correct-recall performance were conducted, with the
first ANOVA including only the study-only and one-guess conditions, and the second ANOVA including only the one-guess and
three-guesses conditions. Critically, both ANOVAs again revealed
significant main effects of TYPE OF PRACTICE, all ps < .001, reflecting
that overall recall performance was improved in the one-guess
condition, relative to the study-only condition, and was improved in
the three guesses-condition, relative to the one-guess condition. Both
ANOVAs showed no interaction between factors, all ps ≥ .85.
Intrusions. All commission errors produced on the final test
were counted as intrusions. Table 1 shows intrusion rates—that is,
the number of intrusions divided by the number of study items in a
condition—as a function of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF PRACTICE. A 2 × 3
mixed ANOVA of the two factors on intrusion rate revealed significant main effects of AGE GROUP, F(1, 118) = 6.58, p = .012, η2 p =
2 p
2 p
.05, and TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(2, 236) = 15.62, p < .001, η2 p = .12,
reflecting that the overall intrusion rate of older adults was higher
than of young adults (30.4% vs. 21.2%) and that the overall intrusion
rate decreased with number of initial guessing attempts (30.1% vs.
25.0% vs. 22.2%). Critically, there was no significant interaction
2 Nonparametric ANOVAs were used because (a) the high frequency of
zero correct guesses on the pretest can pose an issue for parametric ANOVA
with its normality assumption and (b) the number of items on which the
calculation of final test recall is based on can vary slightly between participants, which a parametric ANOVA cannot account for. Both issues are
unproblematic with the nonparametric ART procedure (Wobbrock et al.,
2011). We thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing out the potential
problems when using parametric ANOVAs for this type of data analysis but
would also like to emphasize that for both experiments exactly the same
pattern of results emerged when parametric ANOVAs were used.
906
KLIEGL, BARTL, AND BÄUML
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Three guesses
One guess
Type of pracce
Three guesses
One guess
Type of pracce
0
Study only
0
Study only
(B)
100
100
Correct recall (in %)
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Correct recall (in %)
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
20
20
Study only One guess
TESTED
Three
guesses
TESTED
One guess
UNTESTED
Three
guesses
UNTESTED
Study only One guess
TESTED
Three
guesses
TESTED
One guess
UNTESTED
Three
guesses
UNTESTED
Type of pracce
Type of pracce
Note. (A) Results of Experiment 1. Recall performance on the final test (in %) for young and older participants for each of
the three types of practice (study only vs. one guess vs. three guesses). (B) Results of Experiment 2. Recall performance on
the final test (in %) for young and older participants for the study-only condition and, separately for tested and untested
sentences, for the one-guess and three-guesses conditions. Error bars reflect standard errors.
2 p
between the two factors, F(2, 236) = 1.21, p = .30, η2 p = .01,
suggesting that the effects of TYPE OF PRACTICE did not differ reliably
for the two age groups.
Two separate 2 × 2 mixed ANOVAs of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF
PRACTICE on the intrusion rate were conducted, with the first
ANOVA including only the study-only and one-guess conditions,
and the second ANOVA including only the one-guess and threeguesses conditions. Critically, both ANOVAs again revealed
a significant main effect of TYPE OF PRACTICE, all ps ≤ .004,
reflecting that the overall intrusion rate was reduced in the oneguess condition, relative to the study-only condition, and was
lower in the three guesses-condition, relative to the one-guess
condition. Both ANOVAs showed no interaction between factors, all ps ≥ .13.
In Experiment 1, on average, about 36% of the intrusions made in
the one-guess and three-guess conditions were incorrect guesses
from the acquisition phase for both young and older adults. A 2 × 2
mixed ANOVAs of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF PRACTICE on these
“pretest” intrusions revealed no significant main effects and also no
interaction between factors, all ps ≥ .09, which may be unsurprising
given the relatively low frequency of this type of intrusion.
Discussion
The findings of Experiment 1 replicate previous research by
demonstrating that the size of the pretesting effect can increase in
young adults after three initial guesses, compared to a single initial
guess (Kliegl et al., 2024). More important, the findings suggest that
Figure 1
Results of Experiments 1 and 2
(A)
Young adults
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Correct recall (in %)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Correct recall (in %)
Older adults
Table 1
Mean Intrusion Rate Together With Standard Errors of the Mean (in Brackets) on the Final Test as a Function of Age Group and Type of
Practice for Experiments 1 and 2
26.42 (2.77)
22.84 (2.26)
30.42 (2.77)
20.37 (2.56)
34.25 (3.30)
27.16 (1.92)
18.00 (2.28)
12.03 (1.73)
19.50 (2.28)
15.12 (1.88)
26.00 (2.50)
19.44 (1.38)
Experiment 1
Intrusion rate in %
Experiment 2
Intrusion rate in %
Three guesses
Study
Three guesses
Study
Experiment
Older adult
One guess
Young adult
One guess
MAKING GUESSES DURING LEARNING CAN BE BENEFICIAL
907
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
older adults exhibit the same pattern of results. Specifically, older
adults already showed a reliable pretesting effect of approximately
8% after only a single guess, which increased to approximately
14% after three guesses. The results also showed that, for both age
groups, the number of intrusions produced on the final test
decreased from study-only to one-guess trials and even from oneguess trials to three-guesses trials. The finding on intrusions is
quite striking because older adults’ episodic memory has been
found to be particularly vulnerable to interference effects (e.g.,
Kliegl et al., 2019), which is why producing multiple erroneous
guesses during pretesting rather could have been expected to lead
to an increased number of intrusions. The observed effects of
pretesting on both correct recall and intrusions may indicate that,
similar to young adults, these guesses facilitate, rather than impair,
access to the target information on the final test (see also General
Discussion).
Experiment 2
The first goal of Experiment 2 was to determine whether the
benefits of repeated guessing attempts during pretesting observed
in Experiment 1 still arise for older adults when using study
material with greater practical relevance (i.e., prose passages). To
this end, both young and older participants studied three prose
passages. One of the passages was presented in the study-only
format, in which the sentences were displayed sequentially on a
computer screen and could be learned immediately. The other two
passages were employed for the one-guess and three-guesses
formats. In these two conditions, sentences were initially presented
in a fill-in-the-blank format and subjects were instructed to generate either one guess or three unique guesses about the missing
key word before the complete sentence was revealed. Using such
prose passages, one prior study has shown that, for young adults,
three initial guessing attempts can induce a larger pretesting effect
than a single initial guessing attempt (Kliegl et al., 2024). Since
Experiment 1 demonstrated parallel increases in the size of the
pretesting effect with repeated guessing attempts for weakly
related word pairs as study material, a priori, one might assume that
such parallel increases also arise for the two age groups when prose
passages are used as study material.
The second goal was to investigate for the two age groups
whether guessing during pretesting can also facilitate later
retention of information that appeared in the passage but was
initially not pretested. To this end, the fill-in-the-blank sentences in
the one-guess and three-guesses formats alternated with complete
sentences (i.e., the untested information). On the final test, participants’ memory of both pretested and not pretested information
was assessed. While prior work suggests that, oftentimes, pretesting fails to induce any transfer to untested material even in
young adults (e.g., James & Storm, 2019; Kliegl et al., 2024;
Richland et al., 2009), it has been demonstrated that transfer effects
can arise when participants are explicitly instructed to study not
only the pretested material but also untested information (e.g.,
Carpenter & Toftness, 2017). Therefore, we assumed that emphasizing the importance of studying all sentences for the later test might
promote also final test performance of untested information for the
two age groups.
Method
Participants
Fifty-four young adults with a mean age of 21.8 years (48 female,
six male, zero diverse) and 54 older adults with a mean age of 66.6
years (36 female, 18 male, zero diverse) were recruited to take part in
Experiment 2. For reasons of counterbalancing, six fewer participants were tested than in Experiment 1. We recruited young adults
from Regensburg University and older adults from the community.
All data were collected between September 2023 and February
2024. All participants were Caucasian and gave their spoken informed
consent. Young participants were compensated either financially or
earned some course credit for their participation. Older participants all
received a compensatory amount of money for their participation.
Compared to young adults, older adults performed significantly worse
in the Mini Mental State Examination (young adults: 29.9; older
adults: 28.9), t(106) = 5.62, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 1.08, and the digit
span task (young adults: 16.6; older adults: 15.5), t(106) = 2.13, p =
.035, Cohen’s d = 0.41, but significantly better in the MWT-B (young
adults: 26.9; older adults: 32.8), t(118) = 9.80, p < .001, Cohen’s
d = 1.89,
Material
All participants studied three short German text passages which
had previously been used in Kliegl et al. (2024, Experiment 4) and
dealt with the former U.S. President Woodrow Wilson (233 words),
the country of Brazil (266 words), and Tapirs (252 words). The texts
were created on the basis of information taken from Wikipedia
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woodrow/Wilson; https://en.wikipe
dia.org/wiki/Brazil; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tapir). For each
of the three texts, understanding of their later sections did not depend
on integration with their earlier sections (e.g., Kriechbaum & Bäuml,
2024; Wissman et al., 2011). The three texts consisted of 12 sentences
and were employed equally often in each of the three practice
conditions. For each sentence, a short-answer question was created for
the final test which was based on information that appeared in the
sentence (e.g., When did Woodrow Wilson’s presidency begin?). We
divided these 12 questions into two subgroups (Subgroups A and B),
each of which contained six questions. For half of the young and older
adults, the responses that were required for the questions of Subgroup
A referred to the key word missing in the fill-in-the-blank sentences,
while for the other half of young and older adults, the responses that
were required for the questions of Subgroup B referred to the key
word missing in these fill-in-the-blank sentences. On the final test,
participants had to respond to all 12 questions.
Design and Procedure
The experiment again used a mixed design with the betweensubjects factor AGE GROUP (young adults vs. older adults) and the
within-subjects factor TYPE OF PRACTICE (study only vs. one guess vs.
three guesses). In each of the three practice conditions, all participants first studied one of the three texts and, after completing a
5 min distractor activity, engaged in a final test on that passage (see
Figure 2). During the acquisition phase of the study-only condition,
the 12 sentences of a passage were shown one by one. Each sentence
was presented for 25 s overall. During the acquisition phase of
the one-guess condition, the 12 sentences of a passage were again
908
KLIEGL, BARTL, AND BÄUML
5 min
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt? In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
In which year was Woodrow Wil
born?
oodrow Wilson zur Welt? In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
In which year was Woodrow Wilson
born?
FINAL TEST
Which university did Woodrow
Wilson aend?
Note. While in the study-only condition, the 12 sentences of a passage were shown sequentially, in the one-guess and three-guesses
conditions, the 12 sentences were also shown sequentially, but for six of the sentences, one key word was missing and participants had
to make either one guess or three unique guesses before the missing word was revealed. Complete and fill-in-the-blank sentences were
always presented alternatingly in the one-guess and three-guesses conditions. After this acquisition phase and a 5-min interval filled
with unrelated distractor activities, participants engaged in a final test on all 12 sentences.
presented one by one at a rate of 25 s per sentence. However, only six
of the sentences appeared intact from the beginning. For the other six
sentences, a key word was missing (e.g., Woodrow Wilson was born
in ____ [year] in Staunton, Virginia, as the third of four children.)
and participants were informed 10 s after the onset of the sentence via
a tone signal to make a guessing attempt. Subjects were given 5 s to
attempt their guess before the key word was shown for 10 s. The
acquisition phase of the three-guesses condition resembled the
acquisition phase of the one-guess condition with the only exception
being that participants were required to produce three unique guesses
before the key word was shown. Participants had 5 s for each guess. A
critical feature of the one-guess and three guesses conditions was that
fill-in-the-blank sentences and complete sentences were always
shown in an alternating manner. After the acquisition phase, participants engaged in a backward counting task for 1 min and in the
standard progressive matrices task for another 4 min before the final
test on the immediately preceding text was conducted. This test
included the 12 questions on the text, with each question referring to
one particular sentence of the text (e.g., In which year was Woodrow
Wilson born?). Participants were required to answer each question
within a time frame of 8 s. After this test, participants played Tetris
(https://www.geo.de/geolino/spiele/13349-rtkl-onlinespiel-tetris) for
3 min prior to the presentation of the next text passage.
Results
Initial Pretest
A 2 × 2 ANOVA of the between-subjects factor AGE GROUP (young
vs. older adults) and the within-subjects factor TYPE OF PRACTICE
2 p
(one guess vs. three guesses) on percentage of correct guesses during
the initial pretest showed a significant main effect of TYPE OF PRACTICE,
F(1, 106) = 8.09, p = .005, η2 p = .07, reflecting that more correct
guesses were made for item pairs for which participants were allowed
to make three guessing attempts, relative to one guessing attempt
(8.2% vs. 4.5%). There was no significant main effect of AGE GROUP
and no significant interaction between factors, all Fs < 1.
Final Test
Correct Recall—Tested Information. Figure 1B shows the
percentage of initially pretested questions for which correct answers
were given on the final test as a function of the between-subjects
factor AGE GROUP (young adults vs. older adults) and the withinsubjects factor TYPE OF PRACTICE (study only vs. one guess vs. vs.
three guesses). A 2 × 3 mixed ANOVA of the two factors on correctrecall performance revealed significant main effects of AGE GROUP,
F(1, 106) = 60.31, p < .001, η2 p = .36, and TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(2,
2 p
2 p
212) = 21.41, p < .001, η2 p = .17, reflecting that overall recall
performance of older adults was lower than of young adults (55.9%
vs. 76.7%) and that overall recall performance was lower for the
study-only condition than the one-guess and three-guesses conditions (58.9% vs. 70.1% vs. 69.8%). Critically, there was a significant
interaction between the two factors, F(2, 212) = 3.13, p = .046, η2 p =
2 p
interaction between the two factors, F(2, 212) = 3.13, p = .046, η2 p =
.03, suggesting that the effects of TYPE OF PRACTICE varied with
age group.
Two separate 2 × 2 mixed ANOVAs of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF
PRACTICE on correct-recall performance were conducted, with the
first ANOVA including only the study-only and one-guess conditions, and the second ANOVA including only the one-guess and
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Figure 2
Procedure of Experiment 2
Study only
One guess
Three guesses
ACQUISITION
or
or
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
Woodrow Wilson was born in 18
in Staunton, Virginia, as the third
In welchem Jahr kam
oodrow Wilson zur Welt?
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
Woodrow Wilson was born in 1856
in Staunton, Virginia, as the third of
four children.
Woodrow Wilson aended Johns
Hopkins University.
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
Woodrow Wilson was born in __
in Staunton, Virginia, as the third
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
Woodrow Wilson was born in ____
in Staunton, Virginia, as the third of
four children.
„1912“
„1912“
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
Woodrow Wilson was born in __
in Staunton, Virginia, as the third
In welchem Jahr kam
oodrow Wilson zur Welt?
In welchem Jahr kam
Woodrow Wilson zur Welt?
Woodrow Wilson was born in ____
in Staunton, Virginia, as the third of
four children.
„1793“
„1897“
Woodrow Wilson aended Johns
Hopkins University.
Woodrow Wilson aended Johns
Hopkins University.
MAKING GUESSES DURING LEARNING CAN BE BENEFICIAL
909
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
three-guesses conditions. The first ANOVA showed a significant
main effect of TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(1, 106) = 31.33, p < .001, η2 p =
2 p
main effect of TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(1, 106) = 31.33, p < .001, η2 p =
.23, reflecting an overall increase in correct answers from the
study-only to the one-guess condition. Furthermore, the first
ANOVA showed no significant interaction between the two factors, F(1, 106) = 1.79, p = .18, η2 p = .02, reflecting that both age
2 p
2 p
2 p
tors, F(1, 106) = 1.79, p = .18, η2 p = .02, reflecting that both age
groups showed a similar increase in correct answers from the
study-only to the one-guess condition. Critically, the second
ANOVA showed no reliable main effect of TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(1,
106) < 1, η2 p = .002, reflecting no reliable difference in overall
correct answers between the one-guess and the three-guesses conditions. In addition, this ANOVA did show a significant interaction
between factors, F(1, 106) = 7.96, p = .006, η2 p = .07. Consistently,
planned comparisons using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test revealed
that young adults’ correct recall increased reliably from the one-guess
to the three-guesses condition (77.7% vs. 83.6%), Z(53) = 2.01, p =
.04, whereas older adults’ correct recall did not differ reliably between
the one-guess and the three-guesses conditions (62.6% vs. 56.0%),
Z(53) = 1.73, p = .08.
Correct Recall—Untested Information. Figure 1B shows the
percentage of initially untested questions for which correct answers
were given on the final test. A 2 × 3 mixed ANOVA on correctrecall performance revealed significant main effects of AGE GROUP,
F(1, 106) = 50.44, p < .001, η2 p = .32, and TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(2,
2 p
2 p
212) = 5.47, p = .004, η2 p = .05, reflecting that overall recall
performance of older adults was lower than of young adults (45.7%
vs. 65.7%) and that overall recall performance was lower for the
one-guess condition than the study-only and three-guesses conditions (58.9% vs. 51.7% vs. 56.4%).
Two separate 2 × 2 mixed ANOVAs of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF
PRACTICE on correct-recall performance were conducted, with the
first ANOVA including only the study-only and one-guess conditions, and the second ANOVA including only the one-guess and
three-guesses conditions. Both ANOVAs revealed significant main
effects of TYPE OF PRACTICE, all ps ≤ .036, reflecting overall lower
recall performance in the one-guess than study-only condition for
the first ANOVA and overall higher recall performance in the threeguesses than one-guess condition for the second ANOVA. Neither
of the two ANOVAs showed a significant interaction between
factors, all ps ≥ .45. A third 2 × 2 mixed ANOVAs of AGE GROUP and
TYPE OF PRACTICE on correct-recall performance which included only
the study-only and three-guesses condition showed neither a main
effect of TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(1, 106) = 1.64, p = .20, η2 p = .02, nor an
2 p
2 p
interaction between factors, F(1, 106) < 1, η2 p = .001.
Intrusions. Since the analysis of correct-recall performance did
not provide any evidence of transfer effects, we report analyses of
intrusion errors only for the tested information. Table 1 shows
intrusion rates as a function of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF PRACTICE. A 2 ×
3 mixed ANOVA of the two factors on intrusion rate revealed
significant main effects of AGE GROUP, F(1, 106) = 16.32, p < .001,
η2 p = .13, and TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(2, 212) = 9.74, p < .001, η2 p = .08,
reflecting that overall intrusion rate of older adults was higher than
of young adults (23.5% vs. 15.5%) and that overall intrusion rate
was higher for the study-only condition than the one-guess and
three-guesses conditions (23.3% vs. 17.7% vs. 17.4%). There was
no significant interaction between the two factors, F(2, 212) < 1,
η2 p = .007.
Two separate 2 × 2 mixed ANOVAs of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF
PRACTICE on intrusion rate were conducted, with the first ANOVA
2 p
including only the study-only and one-guess conditions, and the
second ANOVA including only the one-guess and three-guesses
conditions. Critically, only the first ANOVA showed a significant
main effect of TYPE OF PRACTICE, F(1, 106) = 12.58, p < .001, η2 p =
2 p
2 p
.11, whereas the second ANOVA did not, F(1, 106) < 1, η2 p = .001,
reflecting an overall decrease in intrusions from the study-only to the
one-guess condition but not from the one-guess to the three-guesses
condition. Neither of the two ANOVAs showed a significant
interaction between factors, all ps ≥ .29.
In Experiment 2, on average, about 9% (young adults) and 8%
(older adults) of the intrusions made in the one-guess and threeguess conditions were incorrect pretest guesses. The relatively low
percentage of pretest intrusions in Experiment 2 compared to
Experiment 1 may indicate that the type of study material influences
the probability of “pretest” intrusions, with semantically richer prose
passages (Experiment 2) potentially making participants less susceptible to this type of commission error than weakly related word
pairs (Experiment 1). Like in Experiment 1, a 2 × 2 mixed ANOVAs
of AGE GROUP and TYPE OF PRACTICE on “pretest” intrusions did not
reveal any reliable main effects or an interaction, all ps ≥ .65.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 showed a pretesting effect for both
young and older adults when a single guess had been made initially,
thereby replicating the findings of the current Experiment 1.
However, only young adults were found to benefit from three initial
guessing attempts, whereas older adults even showed a numerical,
but not statistically significant, decrease in final test recall after three
guesses, relative to a single guess. Critically, older adults’ final test
recall of pretested information following three initial guesses was
still greater than following study only, suggesting that older adults
did benefit, at least to some degree, from multiple initial guesses.
The results on intrusion rates suggest that pretesting again reduced
intrusions on the final test for both age groups, but that the added
reduction in intrusions was not statistically reliable when three
guesses, instead of one guess, had to be made.
Furthermore, the current results suggest that for both age groups,
pretesting was unable to enhance subsequent memory performance
of information that was not pretested. This held both in response to a
single initial guess and three initial guesses, which aligns with the
results of a recent study showing also no benefits for young adults of
either one or three initial guesses on later recall of untested
information (Kliegl et al., 2024). The current findings suggest that
even emphasizing to participants that all details contained within the
prose passages would be relevant for the final test does not necessarily trigger a transfer effect of pretesting.
General Discussion
The present study demonstrates that both young and older adults
can benefit from pretesting even when multiple initial guesses are
made during acquisition. For young adults, the results of
Experiments 1 and 2 showed that, with both weakly associated word
pairs and prose passages as study material, repeated initial guessing
attempts can increase the size of the pretesting effect on the final
test—thus replicating prior work (Kliegl et al., 2024). However,
final test recall in Experiment 2 did not provide evidence for a
pretest-induced transfer effect to previously untested but studied
910
KLIEGL, BARTL, AND BÄUML
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
information (for a more detailed discussion, see below). As for
young adults, Experiment 1 showed a reliable pretesting effect for
older adults after one initial guessing attempt which increased in
magnitude when three initial guesses had to be made. Experiment 2
also showed mostly parallel effects of pretesting between young and
older adults, with reliable pretesting effects following both a single
guess and three guesses, as well as a lack of any transfer effects to
previously untested but studied information. Unlike for young
adults, however, Experiment 2 found no additional benefit of
repeated guessing attempts during pretesting for older adults.
The Effects of Pretesting on Tested Information
The current results on the effects of pretesting on tested material
are well in line with the elaboration account for young adults.
According to this explanation of the pretesting effect, initial guessing
attempts should induce a more elaborate activation of memory representations related to the cue item than study only, thus facilitating
access to the target item on the final test. Consequently, repeated
guessing attempts during pretesting would be expected to create even
more memory traces than a single guessing attempt through which
retrieval of the target item is enabled on the final test, thereby
increasing the magnitude of the pretesting effect. For young adults,
both Experiments 1 and 2 found that the magnitude of the pretesting
effect increased with the number of initial guessing attempts, which
is exactly what the account predicts. For older adults, only
Experiment 1—but not Experiment 2—demonstrated that the
magnitude of the pretesting effect increased with number of
guesses, which appears more difficult to align with the elaboration view (see below).
While most of the present results for tested material are broadly
consistent with the elaboration account of the pretesting effect, most
of these results also align with another prominent explanation of the
effect—the episodic context account (Metcalfe & Huelser, 2020).
This account proposes that when we store information, we encode
features of the temporal context that is present when we encounter
that information (Estes, 1955; Mensink & Raaijmakers, 1988).
These features may relate to various aspects of an event, such as the
external environment or a person’s mental state. While temporal
context is assumed to change over time, there is evidence that certain
activities, such as memory retrieval, can accelerate contextual shifts
(e.g., Jang & Huber, 2008; Jonker et al., 2013). Since pretesting
should involve higher levels of memory retrieval than studying
alone, pretested information can get linked to a richer context that
includes an integrated memory representation of the pretest context
and the study context, whereas study-only information should be
linked with merely the study context. Repeated guessing attempts
during pretesting may afford an additional benefit because each
guessing triggers a slightly new context and therefore a wider variety
of contextual elements that become associated with the pretested
information, thereby promoting recall of the pretested information on
the final test. While the account resembles the elaboration account by
assuming that repeated guesses induce a richer memory representation
than a single guess, critically, this enrichment is thought to be
episodic—and not semantic—in nature. The account thus can also
explain the beneficial effects of repeated guessing attempts on later
recall. However, as with the elaboration account, it is also not
immediately obvious how it should explain why older adults only
showed an increased pretesting effect when the number of guesses was
increased in Experiment 1, but not in Experiment 2.
The discrepancy in results between weakly related word pairs
(Experiment 1) and more factual text-based material (Experiment 2)
may remind us of earlier work on possible differences in pretesting
effects between word pairs and text-based material, in which
immediate correct-answer feedback was required to induce the effect
with weakly associated word pairs, whereas delayed feedback produced the effect with trivia questions or prose passages (e.g., Kornell,
2014; Richland et al., 2009). This discrepancy has been attributed, for
instance, to the possibility that pretest cues (i.e., questions) which
refer to text-based material—such as What year was Woodrow Wilson
born?—may generally be more memorable after a delay than pretest
cues which refer to an associated cue word (e.g., star—? Kornell,
2014). Regarding the present discrepancy in results obtained for word
pairs and prose passages, there may be a critical role for older adults’
well-known susceptibility to intralist interference (e.g., Radvansky
et al., 2005)—a type of interference arising from the competition
between elements of a single study list or segment (e.g., Raaijmakers &
Shiffrin, 1981; Rundus, 1973).
Indeed, while the weakly related word pairs used in Experiment 1
have been shown in earlier work to induce relatively low levels of
interference between the pairs of a list (Tulving & Arbuckle, 1963),
the fact that the sections of the text passages used in Experiment 2
were difficult to integrate but all revolved around the same topic
(e.g., Woodrow Wilson) without being easily integrated makes it
possible that the text passages had considerable potential to induce
intralist interference. This interference potential may have been
particularly high on the final test when participants were asked to
recall information for which three guesses had been made during
pretesting. In these cases, participants not only had their own guesses
as a possible source of interference but also facts from the other
sections of the text. For instance, the final test question What year was
Woodrow Wilson born? (correct answer: 1856) may not only have
elicited earlier guesses (e.g., 1920, 1834, 1899) but also, for example,
the year in which Wilson enrolled at his university (i.e., 1883). Due to
their increased susceptibility to intralist interference, older adults in
particular may have had problems at accessing the correct response on
the final test, which could explain why repeated guessing attempts
induced no benefits in older adults in Experiment 2. It is still possible
that repeated guessing attempts could benefit memory in older adults
when using texts whose subsections can be integrated more easily
than in the present study (e.g., Kriechbaum & Bäuml, 2024; Wissman
et al., 2011), since integration has been shown to reduce interference
(e.g., Wahlheim & Jacoby, 2013).
The (Lack of) Effects of Pretesting on Untested
Information
If pretesting indeed enhances elaborative encoding, and if this
type of processing spills over to untested information, then recall
performance of untested information should also improve after three
guesses compared to one guess. For young and older adults, the
results of Experiment 2 did reveal such a pattern, which aligns with
the elaboration view. However, these considerations would also lead
to the expectation that recall of untested information is higher after a
single guessing trial—and even more so after three trials—than in
the study-only condition, which was not the case in Experiment 2.
The present results thus did not provide any evidence for pretest
MAKING GUESSES DURING LEARNING CAN BE BENEFICIAL
911
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
induced transfer effects to untested information for either young or
older adults. We had expected that by i) emphasizing to participants
prior to the start of the experiment that all study material would be
relevant on the final test and ii) presenting untested sentences in
close temporal proximity to sentences which received a pretest
during the acquisition phase might promote such transfer. While the
finding appears inconsistent with Carpenter and Toftness (2017)
demonstrating transfer effects when all study material was deemed
important for the later test, it aligns with the observations from
several studies which also failed to provide any evidence for
pretest-induced transfer effects to untested information (e.g.,
James & Storm, 2019; Kliegl et al., 2024; Richland et al., 2009).
Similar to the elaboration account, the episodic context account
cannot easily accommodate for the detrimental effect of pretesting
on the recall of untested information after a single guessing attempt.
Unlike the elaboration account, however, the episodic context
account also cannot explain why three guessing attempts improve
the recall of untested information relative to a single guessing attempt.
Indeed, the episodic context account assumes that pretest-induced
enrichments in mental context should only affect tested information,
irrespective of the number of guessing trials. In its current form, the
account therefore appears less capable of explaining the current
pattern of results for both tested and untested information than the
elaboration account.
The recently proposed attentional-window hypothesis (Sana &
Carpenter, 2023) might explain why we failed to obtain a transfer
effect in Experiment 2. The account applies particularly to pretest
situations in which texts or videos are used as study material and
participants are asked to answer a number of pretest questions before
the material is exposed. The assumption is that such pretesting opens
an attentional window in which participants focus on finding the
correct responses to the pretest questions. Critically, the window is
assumed to close once the correct answer has been found. In support
of their hypothesis, Sana and Carpenter showed that final test recall
of untested information gets boosted when the information appears
“in the attentional window,” that is, prior to the tested information,
but not when the untested information appears after the tested
information. As the untested information in Experiment 2 was always
presented after the tested information, it seems plausible on the basis
of this explanation that no transfer effect was observed. Critically,
the attentional-window and elaboration accounts are not mutually
exclusive because, for instance, a pretest-induced attentional window
might trigger a more elaborative encoding of untested information
that is encountered prior to the pretested information. It should be a
high priority of future research to investigate such a possibility.
A Practical Recommendation
From a more practical perspective, the current findings, together
with prior work (Cyr & Anderson, 2012, 2015) suggest that pretesting
may serve as an effective learning tool not only in young adults but
also in older adults. The results of the present two experiments in
particular indicate that, for both age groups, an initial learning session
which includes at least a single guessing attempt can promote subsequent recall performance more effectively than a learning session
which includes mere study of the information. Another, more preliminary, conclusion from the present findings might be that repeated
initial guessing attempts may further boost older adults’ memory, as
long as a relatively simple learning task is used, in which a cue
information needs to be encoded together with a target information
without distraction from other to-be-learned material. This might
include such tasks as vocabulary learning or the learning of facename pairs. More complex material like prose passages may limit
the pretesting effect—especially when its sections are difficult to
integrate—and not lead to a boost in performance with multiple
guessing attempts.
References
Baddeley, A., & Wilson, B. A. (1994). When implicit learning fails: Amnesia
and the problem of error elimination. Neuropsychologia, 32(1), 53–68.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0028-3932(94)90068-X
Boustani, S., & Shanks, D. R. (2022). Heterogeneity and publication bias in
research on test-potentiated new learning. Collabra: Psychology, 8(1),
Article 31996. https://doi.org/10.1525/collabra.31996
Carpenter, S. K., & Toftness, A. R. (2017). The effect of prequestions
on learning from video presentations. Journal of Applied Research in
Memory and Cognition, 6(1), 104–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jarma
c.2016.07.014
Chan, J. C. K., Meissner, C. A., & Davis, S. D. (2018). Retrieval potentiates
new learning: A theoretical and meta-analytic review. Psychological
Bulletin, 144(11), 1111–1146. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000166
Clare, L., & Jones, R. S. (2008). Errorless learning in the rehabilitation
of memory impairment: A critical review. Neuropsychology Review, 18,
1–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-008-9051-4
Cyr, A. A., & Anderson, N. D. (2012). Trial-and-error learning improves
source memory among young and older adults. Psychology and Aging,
27(2), 429–439. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0025115
Cyr, A. A., & Anderson, N. D. (2015). Mistakes as stepping stones: Effects
of errors on episodic memory among younger and older adults. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 41(3), 841–
850. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000073
Duker, P. C. (1981). Prevention of incorrect responding for establishing
instruction following behaviours. Journal of Mental Deficiency Research,
25(1), 25–32. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2788.1981.tb00090.x
Estes, W. K. (1955). Statistical theory of spontaneous recovery and regression.
Psychological Review, 62, 145–154. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0048509
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., & Lang, A. G. (2009). Statistical power
analyses using G*Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression analyses.
Behavior Research Methods, 41(4), 1149–1160. https://doi.org/10.3758/
BRM.41.4.1149
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., & McHugh, P. R. (1975). “Mini-mental
state”: A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the
clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12(3), 189–198. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0022-3956(75)90026-6
Huelser, B. J., & Metcalfe, J. (2012). Making related errors facilitates
learning, but learners do not know it. Memory & Cognition, 40, 514–527.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-011-0167-z
James, K. K., & Storm, B. C. (2019). Beyond the pretesting effect: What
happens to the information that is not pretested? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 25(4), 576–587. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xap0000231
Jang, Y., & Huber, D. E. (2008). Context retrieval and context change in free
recall: Recalling from long-term memory drives list isolation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 34(1), 112–
127. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.34.1.112
Jonker, T. R., Seli, P., & MacLeod, C. M. (2013). Putting retrieval-induced
forgetting in context: An inhibition-free, context-based account. Psychological
Review, 120(4), 852–872. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034246
Kang, S. H., Pashler, H., Cepeda, N. J., Rohrer, D., Carpenter, S. K., &
Mozer, M. C. (2011). Does incorrect guessing impair fact learning?
Journal of Educational Psychology, 103(1), 48–59. https://doi.org/10
.1037/a0021977
912
KLIEGL, BARTL, AND BÄUML
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
Karpicke, J. D. (2017). Retrieval-based learning: A decade of progress. In
J. H. Byrne (Ed.), Cognitive psychology of memory, Vol. 2 of Learning and
memory: A comprehensive reference (pp. 1–26). Elsevier. https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-809324-5.21055-9
Kay, M., Elkin, L. A., Higgins, J. J., & Wobbrock, J. O. (2021). ARTool:
Aligned rank transform. [R] package with documentation and two vignettes.
Keel, M. C., & Gast, D. L. (1992). Small-group instruction for students
with learning disabilities: Observational and incidental learning.
Exceptional Children, 58(4), 357–368. https://doi.org/10.1177/00144
0299205800408
Kliegl, O., Bartl, J., & Bäuml, K. H. T. (2024). Repeated guessing attempts
during acquisition can promote subsequent recall performance. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 30(2), 282–292. https://doi.org/10
.1037/xap0000493
Kliegl, O., Carls, T., & Bäuml, K.-H. T. (2019). How delay influences search
processes at test. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 45(12), 2174–2187. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000701
Kornell, N. (2014). Attempting to answer a meaningful question enhances
subsequent learning even when feedback is delayed. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40(1), 106–114. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0033699
Kornell, N., Hays, M. J., & Bjork, R. A. (2009). Unsuccessful retrieval attempts
enhance subsequent learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 35(4), 989–998. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015729
Kornell, N., & Vaughn, K. E. (2016). How retrieval attempts affect learning:
A review and synthesis. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 65, 183–
215. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.plm.2016.03.003
Kriechbaum, V. M., & Bäuml, K.-H. T. (2024). Retrieval practice can
promote new learning with both related and unrelated prose materials.
Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 13(3), 319–328.
https://doi.org/10.1037/mac0000162
Lehrl, S. (2005). MWT-B Mehrfachwahl. Wortschatz-Intelligenztest [MultipleChoice Vocabulary Intelligence Test (MWT-B)]. Spitta-Verlag.
Mensink, G. J. M., & Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (1988). A model for interference
and forgetting. Psychological Review, 95(4), 434–455. https://doi.org/10
.1037/0033-295X.95.4.434
Metcalfe, J., & Huelser, B. J. (2020). Learning from errors is attributable to
episodic recollection rather than semantic mediation. Neuropsychologia, 138,
Article 107296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107296
Metcalfe, J., & Kornell, N. (2007). Principles of cognitive science in
education: The effects of generation, errors, and feedback. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 14, 225–229. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03194056
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., & Schreiber, T. A. (1998). The University of
South Florida word association, rhyme, and word fragment norms. https://
w3.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/
Pan, S. C., & Carpenter, S. K. (2023). Prequestioning and pretesting effects:
A review of empirical research, theoretical perspectives, and implications
for educational practice. Educational Psychology Review, 35(4), Article
97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-023-09814-5
Raaijmakers, J. G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of associative memory.
Psychological Review, 88(2), 93–134. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X
.88.2.93
Radvansky, G. A., Zacks, R. T., & Hasher, L. (2005). Age and inhibition:
The retrieval of situation models. The Journals of Gerontology Series B:
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 60(5), 276–278. https://
doi.org/10.1093/geronb/60.5.P276
Raven, J., Raven, J. C., & Court, J. H. (2000). Standard progressive
matrices. Psychology Press.
Richland, L. E., Kornell, N., & Kao, L. S. (2009). The pretesting effect:
Do unsuccessful retrieval attempts enhance learning? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 15(3), 243–257. https://doi.org/10
.1037/a0016496
Rowland, C. A. (2014). The effect of testing versus restudy on retention:
A meta-analytic review of the testing effect. Psychological Bulletin,
140(6), Article 1432. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0037559
Rundus, D. (1973). Negative effects of using list items as retrieval cues.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 43–50. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(73)80059-3
Sana, F., & Carpenter, S. K. (2023). Broader benefits of the pretesting effect:
Placement matters. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 30(5), 1908–1916.
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-023-02274-6
Skinner, B. F. (1957). Verbal behavior. Prentice Hall.
St. Hilaire, K. J., Chan, J. C., & Ahn, D. (2024). Guessing as a learning
intervention: A meta-analytic review of the prequestion effect. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 31(2), 411–441. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-023-
02353-8
Tulving, E., & Arbuckle, T. Y. (1963). Sources of intratrial interference in
immediate recall of paired associates. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 1(5), 321–334. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(63)
80012-2
Wahlheim, C. N., & Jacoby, L. L. (2013). Remembering change: The
critical role of recursive remindings in proactive effects of memory.
Memory & Cognition, 41, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-012-
0246-9
Watkins, O. C., & Watkins, M. J. (1975). Buildup of proactive inhibition as a
cue-overload effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 1(4), 442–452. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393
.1.4.442
Wilson, B. A., Baddeley, A., Evans, J. J., & Shiel, A. (1994). Errorless learning
in the rehabilitation of memory impaired people. Neuropsychological
Rehabilitation, 4(3), 307–326. https://doi.org/10.1080/096020194084
01463
Wissman, K. T., Rawson, K. A., & Pyc, M. A. (2011). The interim test effect:
Testing prior material can facilitate the learning of new material.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18, 1140–1147. https://doi.org/10.3758/
s13423-011-0140-7
Wobbrock, J. O., Findlater, L., Gergle, D., & Higgins, J. J. (2011). The
aligned rank transform for nonparametric factorial analyses using only
ANOVA procedures. Proceedings of the ACM conference on human
factors in computing systems (CHI ‘11) (pp. 143–146). Association for
Computing Machinery.
Zawadzka, K., & Hanczakowski, M. (2019). Two routes to memory
benefits of guessing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 45(10), 1748–1760. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xlm0000676
Received December 19, 2024
Revision received June 26, 2025
Accepted June 27, 2025 ▪
Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.
